 Sidon is on the sea-board of the Assyrian Ocean: it is the Phoenicians’ mother city, and its people may be termed the father of the Theban race. There is a double harbour in the bay, wide within but with a narrow entrance so as to land-lock the sea by a gentle curve: where the bay makes an inward turn towards the right, a second inlet has been channelled out, for the water to run in, and thus there is formed a further harbour behind the first, so that in winter the ships can lie safely in the inner basin, while in summer they need not proceed further than the outer port. On arriving there after a severe storm, I went to make my votive offerings for my safe arrival to the Phoenicians’ goddess; Astarte the people of Sidon call her: as I was thus walking about the city, paying especial attention to the temple-offerings, I saw a picture hanging up which was a landscape and a seascape Sidon is on the sea-board of the Assyrian Ocean: it is the Phoenicians’ mother city, and its people may be termed the father of the Theban race. There is a double harbour in the bay, wide within but with a narrow entrance so as to land-lock the sea by a gentle curve: where the bay makes an inward turn towards the right, a second inlet has been channelled out, for the water to run in, and thus there is formed a further harbour behind the first, so that in winter the ships can lie safely in the inner basin, while in summer they need not proceed further than the outer port. On arriving there after a severe storm, I went to make my votive offerings for my safe arrival to the Phoenicians’ goddess; Astarte the people of Sidon call her: as I was thus walking about the city, paying especial attention to the temple-offerings, I saw a picture hanging up which was a landscape and a seascape in one.
 The painting was of Europa: the sea depicted was the Phoenician Ocean; the land, Sidon. On the land part was a meadow and a troop of girls: in the sea a bull was swimming, and on his back sat a beautiful maiden, borne by the bull towards Crete. The meadow was thick with all kinds of flowers, and among them was planted a thicket of trees and shrubs, the trees growing so close that their foliage touched: and the branches, intertwining their leaves, thus made a kind of continuous roof over the flowers beneath. The artist had also represented the shadows thrown by the leaves, and the sun was gently breaking through, here and there, on to the meadow, where the painter had represented openings in the thick roof of foliage. The meadow was surrounded on all sides by an enclosure, and lay wholly within the embowering roof; beneath the shrubs grass-beds of flowers grew orderly—narcissus, roses, and bays; in the middle of the meadow in the picture flowed a rivulet of water, bubbling up on one side from the ground, and on the other watering the flowers and shrubs; and a gardener had been painted holding a pick, stooping over a single channel and leading a path for the water. The painter had put the girls at one end of the meadow where the land jutted out into the sea. Their look was compounded of joy and fear: garlands were bound about their brows; their hair had been allowed to flow loose on their shoulders; their legs were bare, covered neither by their tunics above nor their sandals below, a girdle holding up their skirts as far as the knee; their faces were pale and their features distorted; their eyes were fixed widein one. The painting was of Europa: the sea depicted was the Phoenician Ocean; the land, Sidon. On the land part was a meadow and a troop of girls: in the sea a bull was swimming, and on his back sat a beautiful maiden, borne by the bull towards Crete. The meadow was thick with all kinds of flowers, and among them was planted a thicket of trees and shrubs, the trees growing so close that their foliage touched: and the branches, intertwining their leaves, thus made a kind of continuous roof over the flowers beneath. The artist had also represented the shadows thrown by the leaves, and the sun was gently breaking through, here and there, on to the meadow, where the painter had represented openings in the thick roof of foliage. The meadow was surrounded on all sides by an enclosure, and lay wholly within the embowering roof; beneath the shrubs grass-beds of flowers grew orderly—narcissus, roses, and bays; in the middle of the meadow in the picture flowed a rivulet of water, bubbling up on one side from the ground, and on the other watering the flowers and shrubs; and a gardener had been painted holding a pick, stooping over a single channel and leading a path for the water. The painter had put the girls at one end of the meadow where the land jutted out into the sea. Their look was compounded of joy and fear: garlands were bound about their brows; their hair had been allowed to flow loose on their shoulders; their legs were bare, covered neither by their tunics above nor their sandals below, a girdle holding up their skirts as far as the knee; their faces were pale and their features distorted; their eyes were fixed wide open upon the sea, and their lips were slightly parted, as if they were about to utter a cry of fear; their hands were stretched out in the direction of the bull.
 They were standing on the water’s edge, so that the surge just wetted their feet: and they seemed to be anxious to run after the bull, but to be afraid of entering the water. The sea had two different tinges of colour; towards the land it was almost red, but out towards the deep water it was dark blue: and foam, and rocks, and wave crests had been painted in it. The rocks ran out from the shore and were whitened with foam, while the waves rose into crests and were then dashed into foam by breaking upon the rocks. Far out in the ocean was painted a bull breasting the waves, while a billow rose like a mountain where his leg was bent in swimming: the maiden sat on the middle of his back, not astride but sideways, with her feet held together on the right: with her left hand she clung to his horn, like a charioteer holding the reins, and the bull inclined a little in that direction, guided by the pressure of her hand. On the upper part of her body she wore a tunic down to her groin, and then a robe covered the lower part of her body: the tunic was white, the robe purple: and her figure could be traced under the clothes—the deep-set navel, the long slight curve of the belly, the narrow waist, broadening down to the loins, the breasts gently swelling from her bosom and confined, as well as her tunic, by a girdle: and the tunic was a kind of mirror of the shape of her body. Her hands were held widely apart, the one to the bull’s horn, the other to his tail; andopen upon the sea, and their lips were slightly parted, as if they were about to utter a cry of fear; their hands were stretched out in the direction of the bull. They were standing on the water’s edge, so that the surge just wetted their feet: and they seemed to be anxious to run after the bull, but to be afraid of entering the water. The sea had two different tinges of colour; towards the land it was almost red, but out towards the deep water it was dark blue: and foam, and rocks, and wave crests had been painted in it. The rocks ran out from the shore and were whitened with foam, while the waves rose into crests and were then dashed into foam by breaking upon the rocks. Far out in the ocean was painted a bull breasting the waves, while a billow rose like a mountain where his leg was bent in swimming: the maiden sat on the middle of his back, not astride but sideways, with her feet held together on the right: with her left hand she clung to his horn, like a charioteer holding the reins, and the bull inclined a little in that direction, guided by the pressure of her hand. On the upper part of her body she wore a tunic down to her groin, and then a robe covered the lower part of her body: the tunic was white, the robe purple: and her figure could be traced under the clothes—the deep-set navel, the long slight curve of the belly, the narrow waist, broadening down to the loins, the breasts gently swelling from her bosom and confined, as well as her tunic, by a girdle: and the tunic was a kind of mirror of the shape of her body. Her hands were held widely apart, the one to the bull’s horn, the other to his tail; and with both she held above her head the ends of her veil which floated down about her shoulders, bellying out through its whole length and so giving the impression of a painted breeze.
 Thus she was seated on the bull like a vessel under way, using the veil as a sail; about the bull dolphins gambolled, Cupids sported: they actually seemed to move in the picture. Love himself led the bull—Love, in the guise of a tiny boy, his wings stretched out, wearing his quiver, his lighted torch in his hands: he was turning towards Zeus with a smile on his face, as if he were laughing at him for becoming a bull for his sake. I was admiring the whole of the picture, but—a lover myself—paid particular attention to that part of it where love was leading the bull; and “Look,” I said, “how that imp dominates over sky and land and sea! “As I was speaking, a young man standing by me broke in: “I may term myself a living example of it,” he said; “I am one who has suffered many buffets from the hand of Love.” “How is that? “said I. “What have your sufferings been,with both she held above her head the ends of her veil which floated down about her shoulders, bellying out through its whole length and so giving the impression of a painted breeze. Thus she was seated on the bull like a vessel under way, using the veil as a sail; about the bull dolphins gambolled, Cupids sported: they actually seemed to move in the picture. Love himself led the bull—Love, in the guise of a tiny boy, his wings stretched out, wearing his quiver, his lighted torch in his hands: he was turning towards Zeus with a smile on his face, as if he were laughing at him for becoming a bull for his sake. I was admiring the whole of the picture, but—a lover myself—paid particular attention to that part of it where love was leading the bull; and “Look,” I said, “how that imp dominates over sky and land and sea! “As I was speaking, a young man standing by me broke in: “I may term myself a living example of it,” he said; “I am one who has suffered many buffets from the hand of Love.” “How is that? “said I. “What have your sufferings been, my friend? I can see by your looks that you are not far from being one of the god’s initiates.
 ” “You are stirring a whole swarm of stories,” said he; “my adventures are really like fiction.” “I hope, Sir,” said I, “in the name of Zeus and that very god Love, that you will not hesitate to give me all the same the pleasure of hearing them, even if they are like fiction”: and while I was speaking I took him by the hand and led him to a grove at no great distance, where many thick plane-trees were growing, and a stream of water flowing through, cool and translucent, as if it came from freshly melted snow. There I bade him sit down on a low bench, and I sat by him, and said: “Now is the time to hear your tale; and the surroundings are pleasant and altogether suitable for listening to a love-story.” This is how he began: I am a Phoenician by nation, my country is Tyre; my name is Clitophon, my father is called Hippias, my uncle Sostratus; but he was only my father’s half-brother, on the father’s side, for my grandfather was twice married: my uncle’s mother was a Byzantine woman, my father’s a Tyrian. My uncle has lived all his life at Byzantium, having inherited there a very considerable property from his mother; my father stayed in Tyre. My mother I never knew, as she died when I was a baby; and then my father took a second wife, who was the mother of my sister Calligone. To this sister my father determined to unite me in marriage; but Fate, stronger than the will of man, was reserving another to be my wife.my friend? I can see by your looks that you are not far from being one of the god’s initiates.” “You are stirring a whole swarm of stories,” said he; “my adventures are really like fiction.” “I hope, Sir,” said I, “in the name of Zeus and that very god Love, that you will not hesitate to give me all the same the pleasure of hearing them, even if they are like fiction”: and while I was speaking I took him by the hand and led him to a grove at no great distance, where many thick plane-trees were growing, and a stream of water flowing through, cool and translucent, as if it came from freshly melted snow. There I bade him sit down on a low bench, and I sat by him, and said: “Now is the time to hear your tale; and the surroundings are pleasant and altogether suitable for listening to a love-story.” This is how he began: I am a Phoenician by nation, my country is Tyre; my name is Clitophon, my father is called Hippias, my uncle Sostratus; but he was only my father’s half-brother, on the father’s side, for my grandfather was twice married: my uncle’s mother was a Byzantine woman, my father’s a Tyrian. My uncle has lived all his life at Byzantium, having inherited there a very considerable property from his mother; my father stayed in Tyre. My mother I never knew, as she died when I was a baby; and then my father took a second wife, who was the mother of my sister Calligone. To this sister my father determined to unite me in marriage; but Fate, stronger than the will of man, was reserving another to be my wife.
 Providence sometimes foreshews the future to men in dreams, not so that they may be able to avoid the sufferings fated for them, for they can never get the better of destiny, but in order that they may bear them with the more patience when those sufferings come: for when disasters come all together and unexpectedly, they strike the spirit with so severe and sudden a blow that they overwhelm it; while if they are anticipated, the mind, by dwelling on them beforehand, is able little by little to turn the edge of sorrow. Well, I was nineteen years of age, and my father was making preparations to celebrate my marriage in the following year, when Fate began the drama of my fortunes. I had a dream, in which I seemed to have grown into one with Calligone from the belly downwards, while above we had two separate bodies: then there stood over me a tall woman of fearful appearance; she had a savage countenance, blood-shot eyes, grim, rough cheeks, and snakes for hair; in her right hand she held a sickle, and in her left a torch. She advanced angrily upon me, brandishing the sickle: and then struck with it at my waist, where the two bodies joined, and so cut the maiden away from me. In mortal fear I jumped up, terrified: I told nobody the dream, but revolved inwardly the most gloomy forebodings. Meanwhile, the following events were happening. My father’s brother, as I told you, was Sostratus; and a messenger came from him bringing letters from Byzantium. This was the purport of them:— 4.
 Directly my father had read these words, he jumped up and hurried down to the sea-shore. He was not long in returning, and then there followed him a great number of men-servants and maidservants, sent by Sostratus to accompany his ladies: in the middle of them walked a tall woman richly dressed; and as I gazed at her, I suddenly saw a maiden on her left, who blinded my eyes, as with a stroke of lightning, by the beauty of her face. She was like that picture of Europa on the bull which I saw but just now: an eye at once piercing and voluptuous; golden hair in golden curls; black eyebrows—jet black; pale cheeks, the pallor shading in the centre into a ruddy hue, like that stain wherewith the Lydian women tint ivory; and a mouth that was a rose—a rose-bud just beginning to uncurl its petals. Directly 1 saw her, I was lost: for beauty wounds deeper than any arrow and strikes down through the eyes into the soul; the eye is the passage for love’s wound. All manner of feelings took possession of me at once—admiration, stupefaction, fear, shame, shamelessness. I admired her tall form, I was stupefied by her beauty, I shewed my fear by the beating of my heart; 1 stared shamelessly at her, but I was ashamed to be caught doing so. Try as I would to drag my eyes away from gazing upon her, they would not obey me, but Directly my father had read these words, he jumped up and hurried down to the sea-shore. He was not long in returning, and then there followed him a great number of men-servants and maidservants, sent by Sostratus to accompany his ladies: in the middle of them walked a tall woman richly dressed; and as I gazed at her, I suddenly saw a maiden on her left, who blinded my eyes, as with a stroke of lightning, by the beauty of her face. She was like that picture of Europa on the bull which I saw but just now: an eye at once piercing and voluptuous; golden hair in golden curls; black eyebrows—jet black; pale cheeks, the pallor shading in the centre into a ruddy hue, like that stain wherewith the Lydian women tint ivory; and a mouth that was a rose—a rose-bud just beginning to uncurl its petals. Directly 1 saw her, I was lost: for beauty wounds deeper than any arrow and strikes down through the eyes into the soul; the eye is the passage for love’s wound. All manner of feelings took possession of me at once—admiration, stupefaction, fear, shame, shamelessness. I admired her tall form, I was stupefied by her beauty, I shewed my fear by the beating of my heart; 1 stared shamelessly at her, but I was ashamed to be caught doing so. Try as I would to drag my eyes away from gazing upon her, they would not obey me, but remained fixed upon her by the force of her beauty, and at length they won the day against my will.
 Such was the manner of their arrival. My father then set aside for their use a part of the house, and ordered dinner to be made ready. When the hour for it came, we sat down two on each couch. my father arranged that he and I should occupy the middle one, the two mothers that on the left, and the two maidens the right-hand one. I was overjoyed when I heard of this arrangement, and I could hardly restrain myself from publicly embracing my father for thus putting the girl under my very eyes. I swear that I have not the slightest idea what I ate—I was like a man eating in a dream. I rested myself firmly on my elbow on the couch, and, leaning forward, devoured the maiden with my eyes, sometimes intercepting a glance on her part; for that was my dinner. After it was over, a young slave (one of my father’s servants) came in with a lute ready tuned; first of all he played it with hisremained fixed upon her by the force of her beauty, and at length they won the day against my will. Such was the manner of their arrival. My father then set aside for their use a part of the house, and ordered dinner to be made ready. When the hour for it came, we sat down two on each couch. my father arranged that he and I should occupy the middle one, the two mothers that on the left, and the two maidens the right-hand one. I was overjoyed when I heard of this arrangement, and I could hardly restrain myself from publicly embracing my father for thus putting the girl under my very eyes. I swear that I have not the slightest idea what I ate—I was like a man eating in a dream. I rested myself firmly on my elbow on the couch, and, leaning forward, devoured the maiden with my eyes, sometimes intercepting a glance on her part; for that was my dinner. After it was over, a young slave (one of my father’s servants) came in with a lute ready tuned; first of all he played it with his hands alone, sweeping over the strings and producing a subdued tone by twanging them with his fingers; then he struck the strings with the plectrum, and having played a short prelude he sang in concert with the music.
 The subject of his song was the chiding of Apollo as Daphne fled from him; his pursuit, and how he all but caught her; and then how the maid became a tree, and how Apollo made himself a crown out of its leaves. This story, as he sang it, at last set my heart more fiercely ablaze: for love stories are the very fuel of desire; and however much a man may school himself to continence, by the force of example he is stimulated to imitate it, especially when that example proceeds from one in a higher position than himself: for that shame, which prevents a man going astray, is converted into boldness by the approval of one of higher rank. So I said to myself: “Look, here is Apollo in love, and like you in love with a maiden; and when he is in love, he feels no shame about it, but pursues his maiden, while you hesitate and profess to be ashamed, and encourage a most untimely continence: do you put yourself above a god?” When the evening came, the women went first to bed, and we followed their example after a short interval. The others had taken their pleasure by the satisfying of their appetite, but all feast was through my eyes: so that I retired to rest gorged with the vision of the maiden’s face and sated with undiluted gazing upon her. Indeed, I was drunk with love; but when I reached the chamber where I always lay I was unable to get to sleep. For Nature will have it that diseases andhands alone, sweeping over the strings and producing a subdued tone by twanging them with his fingers; then he struck the strings with the plectrum, and having played a short prelude he sang in concert with the music. The subject of his song was the chiding of Apollo as Daphne fled from him; his pursuit, and how he all but caught her; and then how the maid became a tree, and how Apollo made himself a crown out of its leaves. This story, as he sang it, at last set my heart more fiercely ablaze: for love stories are the very fuel of desire; and however much a man may school himself to continence, by the force of example he is stimulated to imitate it, especially when that example proceeds from one in a higher position than himself: for that shame, which prevents a man going astray, is converted into boldness by the approval of one of higher rank. So I said to myself: “Look, here is Apollo in love, and like you in love with a maiden; and when he is in love, he feels no shame about it, but pursues his maiden, while you hesitate and profess to be ashamed, and encourage a most untimely continence: do you put yourself above a god?” When the evening came, the women went first to bed, and we followed their example after a short interval. The others had taken their pleasure by the satisfying of their appetite, but all feast was through my eyes: so that I retired to rest gorged with the vision of the maiden’s face and sated with undiluted gazing upon her. Indeed, I was drunk with love; but when I reached the chamber where I always lay I was unable to get to sleep. For Nature will have it that diseases and bodily wounds are worse at night: while we are at rest they obtain more power to attack us and aggravate the pain that they cause; for when the body is still, the wound has the more leisure to hurt.
 In like manner the wounds of the soul are far more painful when the body is at rest: for during the daytime the eyes and ears have plenty of occupation and so turn the edge of the disease, distracting the soul so that it has less leisure for its grief; but when the body is bound fast by bodily rest, the soul has the greater freedom to be tossed about by its woe: all the sensations which were lately at rest are then aroused; mourners feel their grief anew, the anxious their cares, those in danger their fears, and lovers their consuming flame. Hardly about daybreak did sleep of a kind take pity upon me and give me a little respite: but not even then could I banish the maiden from my mind; Leucippe was all my dreams—I spoke with her, I sported with her, I ate with her, I touched her; yes, I obtained a greater degree of happiness than in the daytime; for I kissed her, and it was a real kiss: the natural result was that when my servant came to wake me, I upbraided him bitterly for his untimely coming, so that I thus lost so sweet a dream. I arose therefore, and determined to walk up and down somewhere in the house, into my sweetheart’s presence. I took a book, and bent over it, and pretended to read; but every time that I was at the door, my eyes, off the book, ogled her slyly. So making several journeys, andbodily wounds are worse at night: while we are at rest they obtain more power to attack us and aggravate the pain that they cause; for when the body is still, the wound has the more leisure to hurt. In like manner the wounds of the soul are far more painful when the body is at rest: for during the daytime the eyes and ears have plenty of occupation and so turn the edge of the disease, distracting the soul so that it has less leisure for its grief; but when the body is bound fast by bodily rest, the soul has the greater freedom to be tossed about by its woe: all the sensations which were lately at rest are then aroused; mourners feel their grief anew, the anxious their cares, those in danger their fears, and lovers their consuming flame. Hardly about daybreak did sleep of a kind take pity upon me and give me a little respite: but not even then could I banish the maiden from my mind; Leucippe was all my dreams—I spoke with her, I sported with her, I ate with her, I touched her; yes, I obtained a greater degree of happiness than in the daytime; for I kissed her, and it was a real kiss: the natural result was that when my servant came to wake me, I upbraided him bitterly for his untimely coming, so that I thus lost so sweet a dream. I arose therefore, and determined to walk up and down somewhere in the house, into my sweetheart’s presence. I took a book, and bent over it, and pretended to read; but every time that I was at the door, my eyes, off the book, ogled her slyly. So making several journeys, and drawing in fresh draughts of love every time I saw her, I returned with my heart in ill case indeed.
 And those flames went on burning up in me for the next three days. Now I had a cousin called Clinias. Both his parents were dead, and he was young, two years older than myself; one of Love’s adepts. But the object of his affections was a youth; and so strong were his feelings towards him that once when he had bought a horse, and the boy saw it and admired it, he at once sent it to him as a present. So I used constantly to be laughing at him for neglecting all his proper pursuits and having leisure for nought but his affections, a slave to love and pleasure; but he always used to smile, wagging his head and saying: “Mark my words, some day you will be a slave too.” To him then I went, and greeted him, and said: “At last, Clinias, I have been paid out for all my scoffing: I too have become a slave.” He clapped his hands and burst out laughing; then he rose and kissed me—my face bore every sign of a lover’s sleeplessness—and, “Yes,” he said, “you are really in love: your tell-tale eyes shew it.” He was still speaking, when Charicles (that was the name of his dear youth) burst in, greatly disordered, crying: “It is all over with me, Clinias.” Clinias gave a deep groan, as though his life hung on his friend’s, and murmured with a trembling voice: “You will kill me if you do not tell me at once; what is your trouble? What have we to fight against?” “Marriage!” Charicles answered, “which my father is arranging for me, and a marriage with an ugly girl, to give me double agony. Any woman is bad enough, however fair; but if shedrawing in fresh draughts of love every time I saw her, I returned with my heart in ill case indeed. And those flames went on burning up in me for the next three days. Now I had a cousin called Clinias. Both his parents were dead, and he was young, two years older than myself; one of Love’s adepts. But the object of his affections was a youth; and so strong were his feelings towards him that once when he had bought a horse, and the boy saw it and admired it, he at once sent it to him as a present. So I used constantly to be laughing at him for neglecting all his proper pursuits and having leisure for nought but his affections, a slave to love and pleasure; but he always used to smile, wagging his head and saying: “Mark my words, some day you will be a slave too.” To him then I went, and greeted him, and said: “At last, Clinias, I have been paid out for all my scoffing: I too have become a slave.” He clapped his hands and burst out laughing; then he rose and kissed me—my face bore every sign of a lover’s sleeplessness—and, “Yes,” he said, “you are really in love: your tell-tale eyes shew it.” He was still speaking, when Charicles (that was the name of his dear youth) burst in, greatly disordered, crying: “It is all over with me, Clinias.” Clinias gave a deep groan, as though his life hung on his friend’s, and murmured with a trembling voice: “You will kill me if you do not tell me at once; what is your trouble? What have we to fight against?” “Marriage!” Charicles answered, “which my father is arranging for me, and a marriage with an ugly girl, to give me double agony. Any woman is bad enough, however fair; but if she has the bad luck to be ugly, the business is twice as bad.
 But she has a fortune; that is what my father looks at in arranging the match: so that I am unhappy enough to be bartered for her money: I am to be sold into marriage.” When Clinias heard this, he grew suddenly pale; and then he urged the youth to refuse the marriage absolutely, abusing the whole female sex. “Marriage!” he said, “is that what your father is arranging for you already? What have you done, to be so fettered? Do you not remember the words of Zeus: ‘The stolen fire must be avenged, and so Men must seem joyful and hug close their woe’? Such is the pleasure of woman; she is like the Sirens, who kill men by the charm of their song. Why, the magnitude of the evil can be conjectured from the very preparations for a marriage, the whistling of the flutes, the banging of doors, the carrying of torches; anyone who sees all this disturbance would naturally say: ’ How wretched is a bridegroom—he looks to me like one being sent off to the wars.’ If you were one that were uninstructed in the examples of poetry, you might perhaps be unaware of women’s doings; but, as it is, you know enough even to teach others the kind of stories with which women have filled the stage—Eriphyle’shas the bad luck to be ugly, the business is twice as bad. But she has a fortune; that is what my father looks at in arranging the match: so that I am unhappy enough to be bartered for her money: I am to be sold into marriage.” When Clinias heard this, he grew suddenly pale; and then he urged the youth to refuse the marriage absolutely, abusing the whole female sex. “Marriage!” he said, “is that what your father is arranging for you already? What have you done, to be so fettered? Do you not remember the words of Zeus: ‘The stolen fire must be avenged, and so Men must seem joyful and hug close their woe’? Such is the pleasure of woman; she is like the Sirens, who kill men by the charm of their song. Why, the magnitude of the evil can be conjectured from the very preparations for a marriage, the whistling of the flutes, the banging of doors, the carrying of torches; anyone who sees all this disturbance would naturally say: ’ How wretched is a bridegroom—he looks to me like one being sent off to the wars.’ If you were one that were uninstructed in the examples of poetry, you might perhaps be unaware of women’s doings; but, as it is, you know enough even to teach others the kind of stories with which women have filled the stage—Eriphyle’s necklace, Philomela’s feast, Sthenoboea’s false accusation, Aerope’s wicked stratagem, Procne’s murder.
 When Agamemnon desires the beauty of Chryseis, he brings destruction upon the Greek army; when Achilles desires Briseis’ beauty, he makes sorrow for himself. If Candaules has a fair wife, his wife murders Candaules. The fire of Helen’s marriage-torches lit another fire for Troy. But Penelope’s marriage, chaste creature, how many suitors did that destroy? Phaedra destroyed Hippolytus by loving him, Clytemnestra Agamemnon because she loved him not. O women, women, that stay at nothing! If they love, they kill: and if they do not love, they kill all the same. Agamemnon was fated to be murdered—Agamemnon whose beauty was described to be as of heaven. ‘In eyes and head like thunder-hurling Zeus,’ and, O Zeus, a woman lopped off that very head. And all these are the accusations which can be brought against fair women, where the ill-fortune of having to do with them is moderated, for beauty is some consolation in distress, and a certain amount of good luck amid the bad; but if the woman is notnecklace, Philomela’s feast, Sthenoboea’s false accusation, Aerope’s wicked stratagem, Procne’s murder. When Agamemnon desires the beauty of Chryseis, he brings destruction upon the Greek army; when Achilles desires Briseis’ beauty, he makes sorrow for himself. If Candaules has a fair wife, his wife murders Candaules. The fire of Helen’s marriage-torches lit another fire for Troy. But Penelope’s marriage, chaste creature, how many suitors did that destroy? Phaedra destroyed Hippolytus by loving him, Clytemnestra Agamemnon because she loved him not. O women, women, that stay at nothing! If they love, they kill: and if they do not love, they kill all the same. Agamemnon was fated to be murdered—Agamemnon whose beauty was described to be as of heaven. ‘In eyes and head like thunder-hurling Zeus,’ and, O Zeus, a woman lopped off that very head. And all these are the accusations which can be brought against fair women, where the ill-fortune of having to do with them is moderated, for beauty is some consolation in distress, and a certain amount of good luck amid the bad; but if the woman is not even fair, as you tell me, the misfortune is double.
 No one could tolerate such a thing—least of all a youth as fair as you. I pray you, Charicles, by all that you hold holy, do not allow yourself to become a slave, do not throw away untimely the flower of your youth; in addition to all its other disadvantages marriage has this, that it does away with the bloom of vigour and beauty. Do not wither yet, Charicles, I implore you; do not hand over a lovely rose to be plucked by an ill-favoured rustic clown.” “This whole affair,” said Charicles, “must be left to providence and to me; I have, after all, a certain number of days before the day ordained. A great deal can happen even in a single night; and we must think over all this at our leisure. Now, at any rate, I am going riding. I have never made use of your present since you gave me that splendid horse; the exercise will lighten the grief on my mind.” So with this he went away, on what was to be his first and last ride. I related to Clinias my whole story—how it came about, my feelings, how I first saw her, the arrival, the dinner, the great beauty of the maiden. At last I felt that I was talking in a very unseemly way, and burst out: “I cannot bear the pain, Clinias; Love with all his forces has attacked me and drives sleep away from my eyes; I see Leucippe always. No one has ever been in such misery as I am; my grief lives always with me.” “What nonsense you talk,” cried Clinias, “you, who are a fortunate lover. You do not have constantly to be going to the doors of another’s house; you have no need of a messenger; fortune has given her to you, has brought her and established her at youreven fair, as you tell me, the misfortune is double. No one could tolerate such a thing—least of all a youth as fair as you. I pray you, Charicles, by all that you hold holy, do not allow yourself to become a slave, do not throw away untimely the flower of your youth; in addition to all its other disadvantages marriage has this, that it does away with the bloom of vigour and beauty. Do not wither yet, Charicles, I implore you; do not hand over a lovely rose to be plucked by an ill-favoured rustic clown.” “This whole affair,” said Charicles, “must be left to providence and to me; I have, after all, a certain number of days before the day ordained. A great deal can happen even in a single night; and we must think over all this at our leisure. Now, at any rate, I am going riding. I have never made use of your present since you gave me that splendid horse; the exercise will lighten the grief on my mind.” So with this he went away, on what was to be his first and last ride. I related to Clinias my whole story—how it came about, my feelings, how I first saw her, the arrival, the dinner, the great beauty of the maiden. At last I felt that I was talking in a very unseemly way, and burst out: “I cannot bear the pain, Clinias; Love with all his forces has attacked me and drives sleep away from my eyes; I see Leucippe always. No one has ever been in such misery as I am; my grief lives always with me.” “What nonsense you talk,” cried Clinias, “you, who are a fortunate lover. You do not have constantly to be going to the doors of another’s house; you have no need of a messenger; fortune has given her to you, has brought her and established her at your very side.
 Some lovers have to be content with a mere look at their sweetheart, so well guarded is she, and to think themselves very lucky if they can obtain this pleasure of the eye; others are more fortunate, if they can but get a word with her: but you—you are constantly seeing her and hearing her; you eat with her and drink with her: and yet, with all this good fortune, you grumble; let me tell you that you are ungrateful for this gift that Love has made you. You do not know what it is to be able to see the one you love; it is a greater pleasure than further favours. When the eyes meet one another they receive the impression of the body as in a mirror, and this emanation of beauty, which penetrates down into the soul through the eyes, effects a kind of union however the bodies are sundered; ’tis something of a bodily union—a new kind of bodily embrace. But I prophesy to you that you will soon get all you want. There is no more ready road to overcoming the resistance of the beloved than constantly to be in her presence; the eye is the go-between of affection, and the habit of being regularly in one another’s society is a quick and successful way to full favour. Wild beasts can be tamed by habit, as they become used to their masters; how much more easily can a woman’s heart be softened by the same means! And then the fact that her lover is of the same age as herself is a powerful impulse to a maiden. Those feelings which are natural in the heyday of youth, and her knowledge that she is adored, will often inspire her to return your passion; for every maiden wishes to be fair, is pleased to be loved, and is grateful to the lover for the witness that he bears to her charms—if no one were invery side. Some lovers have to be content with a mere look at their sweetheart, so well guarded is she, and to think themselves very lucky if they can obtain this pleasure of the eye; others are more fortunate, if they can but get a word with her: but you—you are constantly seeing her and hearing her; you eat with her and drink with her: and yet, with all this good fortune, you grumble; let me tell you that you are ungrateful for this gift that Love has made you. You do not know what it is to be able to see the one you love; it is a greater pleasure than further favours. When the eyes meet one another they receive the impression of the body as in a mirror, and this emanation of beauty, which penetrates down into the soul through the eyes, effects a kind of union however the bodies are sundered; ’tis something of a bodily union—a new kind of bodily embrace. But I prophesy to you that you will soon get all you want. There is no more ready road to overcoming the resistance of the beloved than constantly to be in her presence; the eye is the go-between of affection, and the habit of being regularly in one another’s society is a quick and successful way to full favour. Wild beasts can be tamed by habit, as they become used to their masters; how much more easily can a woman’s heart be softened by the same means! And then the fact that her lover is of the same age as herself is a powerful impulse to a maiden. Those feelings which are natural in the heyday of youth, and her knowledge that she is adored, will often inspire her to return your passion; for every maiden wishes to be fair, is pleased to be loved, and is grateful to the lover for the witness that he bears to her charms—if no one were in love with her, she could have so far no grounds of confidence that she was beautiful.
 One only piece of advice then I have to give you: let her be sure that she is loved, and she will soon return your affection.” “But how,” said I, “is this prophecy of yours to be accomplished? Indicate to me at any rate how to begin; you were initiated before me into the mysteries of the god and are better acquainted with the course required to become an adept. What am I to say? What am I to do? How am I to win the object of my passion? I have no idea of the way to proceed.” “On this subject,” said Clinias, “you have no need to enquire of another: Love is a self–instructed expert. He is like the new-born babe which needs no teaching from anybody where to look for its nourishment; for that is an accomplishment which it learns of itself, knowing that its table is spread in its mother’s breasts; in the same way a young man for the first time big with love needs no instruction as to how to bring it to birth. For when you begin to feel the pangs and it is clear that the destined day is at hand, you cannot go wrong, even though it be your first labour, but you will find the way to bring forth and the god himself will deliver you. However, you may as well listen to the ordinary maxims which are applicable at any time and need no fortunate occasion. In the first place, say nothing to the maiden of the actual fruition of love, but rather look for a means for your passion silently to be translated into action: boys and girls are alike shamefaced creatures; however much they may be inclined towards the pleasures that Aphrodite can afford, they do not care to hear their experienceslove with her, she could have so far no grounds of confidence that she was beautiful. One only piece of advice then I have to give you: let her be sure that she is loved, and she will soon return your affection.” “But how,” said I, “is this prophecy of yours to be accomplished? Indicate to me at any rate how to begin; you were initiated before me into the mysteries of the god and are better acquainted with the course required to become an adept. What am I to say? What am I to do? How am I to win the object of my passion? I have no idea of the way to proceed.” “On this subject,” said Clinias, “you have no need to enquire of another: Love is a self–instructed expert. He is like the new-born babe which needs no teaching from anybody where to look for its nourishment; for that is an accomplishment which it learns of itself, knowing that its table is spread in its mother’s breasts; in the same way a young man for the first time big with love needs no instruction as to how to bring it to birth. For when you begin to feel the pangs and it is clear that the destined day is at hand, you cannot go wrong, even though it be your first labour, but you will find the way to bring forth and the god himself will deliver you. However, you may as well listen to the ordinary maxims which are applicable at any time and need no fortunate occasion. In the first place, say nothing to the maiden of the actual fruition of love, but rather look for a means for your passion silently to be translated into action: boys and girls are alike shamefaced creatures; however much they may be inclined towards the pleasures that Aphrodite can afford, they do not care to hear their experiences mentioned aloud: they think that modesty is a matter of words, while grown women, on the other hand, take a pleasure in the words too.
 A girl bears calmly the long-range skirmishes that a lover uses to feel his way, and will suddenly express her complacency by a gesture; but if you go bluntly to her with a verbal call to action, you will only shock her ears by the words you employ. She will blush, affect to regard your proposal with horror, and think that an insult is being offered to her; even if she is desirous to afford you her favours, she is ashamed, for it seems to her that she is already yielding, when the pleasure she derives from your words seems to transform your tentative into reality. If, however, you act upon the other tack, gradually moulding her to your wishes and gaining easy access to her, be as silent as in church, but approach her gently and kiss her: if the beloved is compliant, the lover’s kiss is an invitation to her to accord him all her favours; if reluctant, it is a kind of supplication and prayer. Then, even when they have promised and are certain to yield, many of them, however willingly they come into action, prefer the appearance of coercion, so that by a shew of force they can avoid the charge of compliance which would be a reproach to their modesty. Even if you find her persistently obdurate, do not relax your efforts, but rather watch closely for the means of converting her: here too tact is wanted. Do not in any case, if she remains obstinate, employ force; she is not yet sufficiently softened: but if you desire her to melt,mentioned aloud: they think that modesty is a matter of words, while grown women, on the other hand, take a pleasure in the words too. A girl bears calmly the long-range skirmishes that a lover uses to feel his way, and will suddenly express her complacency by a gesture; but if you go bluntly to her with a verbal call to action, you will only shock her ears by the words you employ. She will blush, affect to regard your proposal with horror, and think that an insult is being offered to her; even if she is desirous to afford you her favours, she is ashamed, for it seems to her that she is already yielding, when the pleasure she derives from your words seems to transform your tentative into reality. If, however, you act upon the other tack, gradually moulding her to your wishes and gaining easy access to her, be as silent as in church, but approach her gently and kiss her: if the beloved is compliant, the lover’s kiss is an invitation to her to accord him all her favours; if reluctant, it is a kind of supplication and prayer. Then, even when they have promised and are certain to yield, many of them, however willingly they come into action, prefer the appearance of coercion, so that by a shew of force they can avoid the charge of compliance which would be a reproach to their modesty. Even if you find her persistently obdurate, do not relax your efforts, but rather watch closely for the means of converting her: here too tact is wanted. Do not in any case, if she remains obstinate, employ force; she is not yet sufficiently softened: but if you desire her to melt, you must be prepared to act a part, or else you will lose all the trouble of your plot.
 ” “By your advice, Clinias,” said I, “you have given me the most admirable provision for my journey, and I pray that I may arrive safely; but at the same time I cannot help fearing that my very success may be the beginning of worse troubles and expose me to the more violent flames of love; and at any rate if they do become more savage, what am I to do? I cannot marry her—I am pledged to another maiden; and my father is greatly set on this match. Nor is his object an unreasonable one: he does not ask me to marry a foreigner, or an ugly girl; he does not sell me for gold, as Charicles is to be sold; but he intends for me his own daughter, who was beautiful enough, God knows, before I saw Leucippe; but now I am blind to her beauty and have eyes for Leucippe alone. I am on the horns of a dilemma—Love and my father wait on opposite sides of me: my father stands behind me, holding me back by the respect which I owe to him; Love sits before me, brandishing his torch of fire. How am I to decide the contest, when affection is at war with the promptings of nature? I desire to give my verdict for you, father, but I have a stronger adversary—he puts the judge to the torture, he stands in court armed with his arrows, he pleads his cause with flame; if I do not decide against you, father, I must be utterly consumed by his fire.” We were engaged in this kind of philosophical discussion about Love, when one of Charicles’you must be prepared to act a part, or else you will lose all the trouble of your plot.” “By your advice, Clinias,” said I, “you have given me the most admirable provision for my journey, and I pray that I may arrive safely; but at the same time I cannot help fearing that my very success may be the beginning of worse troubles and expose me to the more violent flames of love; and at any rate if they do become more savage, what am I to do? I cannot marry her—I am pledged to another maiden; and my father is greatly set on this match. Nor is his object an unreasonable one: he does not ask me to marry a foreigner, or an ugly girl; he does not sell me for gold, as Charicles is to be sold; but he intends for me his own daughter, who was beautiful enough, God knows, before I saw Leucippe; but now I am blind to her beauty and have eyes for Leucippe alone. I am on the horns of a dilemma—Love and my father wait on opposite sides of me: my father stands behind me, holding me back by the respect which I owe to him; Love sits before me, brandishing his torch of fire. How am I to decide the contest, when affection is at war with the promptings of nature? I desire to give my verdict for you, father, but I have a stronger adversary—he puts the judge to the torture, he stands in court armed with his arrows, he pleads his cause with flame; if I do not decide against you, father, I must be utterly consumed by his fire.” We were engaged in this kind of philosophical discussion about Love, when one of Charicles’ servants rushed in, with evil tidings so clearly written upon his face that Clinias instantly cried out: “Something has happened to Charicles.
 ” He had not yet finished speaking, when the servant exclaimed in the same breath: “Charicles is dead.” At this announcement Clinias was stricken utterly dumb and stood motionless, as though he had been struck by a whirlwind. The servant went on: “He mounted your horse, Clinias, and at first rode quietly enough upon him; after two or three turns, he pulled him up, and, dropping the reins on his back, began to rub down the sweating animal as he sat. While he was wiping by the saddle, there was a sudden noise behind; the horse was frightened, reared, and bolted wildly. He took the bit between his teeth, tossed up his head, shook his mane, and seemed to fly through the air spurred on by fear; his hinder feet seemed to be trying to catch up his galloping fore-quarters, increasing the speed of his flight and spurring on his pace; his body arched by reason of the contest between his feet, bounding up and down at each stride, the motion of his back was like a ship tossed in a storm. Poor Charicles, thrown up and down rather as if by a wave than on a horse, bounded from the saddle like a ball, at one time slipping back on to the horse’s quarters, at another hurled forward on to his neck, while the tempest-like motion ever more and more overcame his efforts. At last, no longer able to holdservants rushed in, with evil tidings so clearly written upon his face that Clinias instantly cried out: “Something has happened to Charicles.” He had not yet finished speaking, when the servant exclaimed in the same breath: “Charicles is dead.” At this announcement Clinias was stricken utterly dumb and stood motionless, as though he had been struck by a whirlwind. The servant went on: “He mounted your horse, Clinias, and at first rode quietly enough upon him; after two or three turns, he pulled him up, and, dropping the reins on his back, began to rub down the sweating animal as he sat. While he was wiping by the saddle, there was a sudden noise behind; the horse was frightened, reared, and bolted wildly. He took the bit between his teeth, tossed up his head, shook his mane, and seemed to fly through the air spurred on by fear; his hinder feet seemed to be trying to catch up his galloping fore-quarters, increasing the speed of his flight and spurring on his pace; his body arched by reason of the contest between his feet, bounding up and down at each stride, the motion of his back was like a ship tossed in a storm. Poor Charicles, thrown up and down rather as if by a wave than on a horse, bounded from the saddle like a ball, at one time slipping back on to the horse’s quarters, at another hurled forward on to his neck, while the tempest-like motion ever more and more overcame his efforts. At last, no longer able to hold the reins, he completely let himself drive with the storm and was at the mercy of fortune: then the horse, still at top speed, turned aside from the high road, bounded into a wood, and straightway dashed the miserable Charicles against a tree.
 He left the saddle, shot like a stone from a sling; his face was cut to pieces by the tree’s branches and he was covered with as many wounds as there were sharp points on the boughs. The reins twisted round his body, which he was unable to extricate, and then dragged it along with them, making a very path of death. The horse, still more alarmed by the fall and finding his speed checked by the body dragging behind him, trampled upon the unhappy boy, kicking out at what he found to be a check upon his flight; so that now no one who saw him could possibly recognize him as the Charicles they once knew.” At this news Clinias was struck with utter silence for a considerable period; then, as if suddenly awaked from a swoon of grief, he cried out very pitifully and hurried to run to meet the corpse, while I followed him, affording him such poor comfort as I was able. At that moment Charicles was brought in on a bier, a sight most pitiful and sad; he appeared to be all one wound, so that none of the standers-by were able to refrain from tears. His father led the chorus of lamentation, greatly disordered and crying out: “Look on this picture and on that—how you left me and how you come back to me; a curse on all riding of horses! A worse than common death is yours, whichthe reins, he completely let himself drive with the storm and was at the mercy of fortune: then the horse, still at top speed, turned aside from the high road, bounded into a wood, and straightway dashed the miserable Charicles against a tree. He left the saddle, shot like a stone from a sling; his face was cut to pieces by the tree’s branches and he was covered with as many wounds as there were sharp points on the boughs. The reins twisted round his body, which he was unable to extricate, and then dragged it along with them, making a very path of death. The horse, still more alarmed by the fall and finding his speed checked by the body dragging behind him, trampled upon the unhappy boy, kicking out at what he found to be a check upon his flight; so that now no one who saw him could possibly recognize him as the Charicles they once knew.” At this news Clinias was struck with utter silence for a considerable period; then, as if suddenly awaked from a swoon of grief, he cried out very pitifully and hurried to run to meet the corpse, while I followed him, affording him such poor comfort as I was able. At that moment Charicles was brought in on a bier, a sight most pitiful and sad; he appeared to be all one wound, so that none of the standers-by were able to refrain from tears. His father led the chorus of lamentation, greatly disordered and crying out: “Look on this picture and on that—how you left me and how you come back to me; a curse on all riding of horses! A worse than common death is yours, which leaves you an unsightly corpse; when others die, at least the lineaments of their features are preserved, and even if the living bloom of beauty be gone, at least the face keeps a semblance of its former appearance and affords some comfort to the mourner by its mimicry of sleep; death may have snatched away the soul, but at least it leaves in the body the one we knew.
 But with you even this has been destroyed by fate—so you are doubly dead to me, soul and body too; even the very shadow of your likeness is gone—your soul is fled and I cannot find my Charicles in this corpse. When, my child, shall the day of your wedlock be? When shall I perform at your marriage the rites that religion demands, horseman and bridegroom—bridegroom that shall never wed, most unfortunate of horsemen? Your bridal chamber is the grave; your wedlock is with death; the dirge your bridal song; these wailings your marriage lays. A very different fire from this, my child, did I hope to kindle for you; but cruel fate has extinguished both it and you, and lit up in its place the torches of a funeral. A cruel illumination this! The tapers of your marriage rite have become the flambeaux of a requiem.” So wailed his father, and on the other side of the body Clinias was reproaching himself: it was aleaves you an unsightly corpse; when others die, at least the lineaments of their features are preserved, and even if the living bloom of beauty be gone, at least the face keeps a semblance of its former appearance and affords some comfort to the mourner by its mimicry of sleep; death may have snatched away the soul, but at least it leaves in the body the one we knew. But with you even this has been destroyed by fate—so you are doubly dead to me, soul and body too; even the very shadow of your likeness is gone—your soul is fled and I cannot find my Charicles in this corpse. When, my child, shall the day of your wedlock be? When shall I perform at your marriage the rites that religion demands, horseman and bridegroom—bridegroom that shall never wed, most unfortunate of horsemen? Your bridal chamber is the grave; your wedlock is with death; the dirge your bridal song; these wailings your marriage lays. A very different fire from this, my child, did I hope to kindle for you; but cruel fate has extinguished both it and you, and lit up in its place the torches of a funeral. A cruel illumination this! The tapers of your marriage rite have become the flambeaux of a requiem.” So wailed his father, and on the other side of the body Clinias was reproaching himself: it was a very rivalry of laments, the loving friend and the father.
 “It is I,” said he, “that have destroyed him that was the master of my heart. Why did I give him such a gift as that? Why not rather a cup of gold for libations when he drank, to use and pride himself on my present? As it is, wretched fool that I was, I gave this fair lad a wild beast, and I decked out the cursed brute with martingales and frontlets, silver trappings and gold-embroidered reins; yes, alas, Charicles, I furbished up your murderer with gold. Vile horse, the most savage of all beasts, wicked, thankless brute, senseless of beauty, he was wiping away your sweat and promising you a fuller manger and praising your paces; and you killed him as you were being nattered—you took no pleasure in the touch of that beautiful body, that fair horseman was no source of pride in you; you entertained no feelings of affection for him, but dashed his beauty to the ground. Woe is me: it was I that bought for you the cause of your death, your murderer!” When the entombment was over, I hurried to my sweetheart, who was in the garden of our house. This garden was a meadow, a very object of beauty to the eyes; round it ran a wall of sufficient height, and each of the four sides of the wall formed a portico standing on pillars, within which was a close plantation of trees. Their branches, which were in full foliage, intertwined with one another; their neighbouring flowers mingled with each other, their leaves overlapped, their fruits joined. Such was the way in which the trees grew together; to some of the larger of them were ivy and smilax attached, the smilax hanging from planes and filling all thevery rivalry of laments, the loving friend and the father. “It is I,” said he, “that have destroyed him that was the master of my heart. Why did I give him such a gift as that? Why not rather a cup of gold for libations when he drank, to use and pride himself on my present? As it is, wretched fool that I was, I gave this fair lad a wild beast, and I decked out the cursed brute with martingales and frontlets, silver trappings and gold-embroidered reins; yes, alas, Charicles, I furbished up your murderer with gold. Vile horse, the most savage of all beasts, wicked, thankless brute, senseless of beauty, he was wiping away your sweat and promising you a fuller manger and praising your paces; and you killed him as you were being nattered—you took no pleasure in the touch of that beautiful body, that fair horseman was no source of pride in you; you entertained no feelings of affection for him, but dashed his beauty to the ground. Woe is me: it was I that bought for you the cause of your death, your murderer!” When the entombment was over, I hurried to my sweetheart, who was in the garden of our house. This garden was a meadow, a very object of beauty to the eyes; round it ran a wall of sufficient height, and each of the four sides of the wall formed a portico standing on pillars, within which was a close plantation of trees. Their branches, which were in full foliage, intertwined with one another; their neighbouring flowers mingled with each other, their leaves overlapped, their fruits joined. Such was the way in which the trees grew together; to some of the larger of them were ivy and smilax attached, the smilax hanging from planes and filling all the interstices between the boughs with its soft foliage, the ivy twisting up the pines and embracing the trunks, so that the tree formed a support for the ivy, and the ivy a garland for the tree.
 On either side of each tree grew vines, creeping upon reed supports, with luxuriant foliage; these, now in full fruitage, hung from the joints of the reeds, and formed as it were the ringlets of the tree. The leaves higher up were in gentle motion, and the rays of the sun penetrating them as the wind moved them gave the effect of a pale, mottled shadow on the ground. Flowers too of many hues displayed each their own beauty, and this formed the earth’s gay colour—the narcissus and the rose. Now the calyx of the rose and the narcissus was alike so far as shape goes—the cup in fact of the plants. As for the colour of the much-divided petals round the calyx, the rose was like blood above and milk below, whereas the narcissus was wholly of the colour of the lower part of the rose; there were violets too, whose cup-shaped blossoms you could not distinguish, but their colour was as that of a shining calm at sea. In the mist of all these flowers bubbled up a spring, the waters of which were confined in a square artificial basin; the water served as a mirror for the flowers, giving the impression of a double grove, one real and the other a reflexion. Birds there were too: some, tame, sought for food in the grove, pampered and domesticated by the rearing of men; others, wild and on the wing, sported around the summits of the trees; some chirping their birds’ songs, others brilliant in their gorgeous plumage.interstices between the boughs with its soft foliage, the ivy twisting up the pines and embracing the trunks, so that the tree formed a support for the ivy, and the ivy a garland for the tree. On either side of each tree grew vines, creeping upon reed supports, with luxuriant foliage; these, now in full fruitage, hung from the joints of the reeds, and formed as it were the ringlets of the tree. The leaves higher up were in gentle motion, and the rays of the sun penetrating them as the wind moved them gave the effect of a pale, mottled shadow on the ground. Flowers too of many hues displayed each their own beauty, and this formed the earth’s gay colour—the narcissus and the rose. Now the calyx of the rose and the narcissus was alike so far as shape goes—the cup in fact of the plants. As for the colour of the much-divided petals round the calyx, the rose was like blood above and milk below, whereas the narcissus was wholly of the colour of the lower part of the rose; there were violets too, whose cup-shaped blossoms you could not distinguish, but their colour was as that of a shining calm at sea. In the mist of all these flowers bubbled up a spring, the waters of which were confined in a square artificial basin; the water served as a mirror for the flowers, giving the impression of a double grove, one real and the other a reflexion. Birds there were too: some, tame, sought for food in the grove, pampered and domesticated by the rearing of men; others, wild and on the wing, sported around the summits of the trees; some chirping their birds’ songs, others brilliant in their gorgeous plumage.
 The songsters were grasshoppers and swallows: the former sang of Aurora’s marriage-bed, the latter of the banquet of Tereus. There were tame birds too, a peacock, a swan, and a parrot; the swan fed round about the sources of the spring, the parrot was hung in a cage from the branches of a tree, the peacock spread his tail among the flowers, and there was a kind of rivalry between the brilliance of the flowers and the hues of the peacock, whose plumage seemed itself to consist of very flowers. Desiring to influence the thoughts of the maiden so as to make her amenable to love, I began to address myself to Satyrus, taking the birds as my text. Now my sweetheart happened to be walking with Clio and had stopped opposite the peacock, who chanced at that moment to be making a display of all his finery and shewing off his tail to its best advantage. “This bird,” said I, “does not behave thus without intent: he is really an amorous creature; at least he shews off this gorgeous livery when he wishes to attract the object of his passion. Do you not see her (and as I spoke I pointed to the hen) near that plane tree? It is for her that he is shewing his beauties, his train which is a garden in itself—a garden which contains more beautiful flowers than a natural garden, for there is gold in the plumage, with an outer circle of purple running round the whole circle of gold, and on every feather an eye.
 ” Satyrus, perceiving the trend and object of my discourse, was desirous of assisting me to enlarge further on the subject, and, “Has then Love,” said he, “such mighty power that he is able to inflame even birds?” “Not birds only,” I answered; “that would be no marvel, for you too know that he is winged himself, but creeping snakes and plants too, and I believe even stones as well: at least the loadstone loves the iron, and if it may but see it and touch it, it attracts it towards itself as though possessed of the passion of love. May this not be the kiss of the loving stone and the beloved metal? As for plants, the children of wisdom have a tale to tell, one that I should deem a fable were it not that it was borne out by countrymen; and this it is. Plants, they say, fall in love with one another, and the palm is particularly susceptible to the passion: there are both male and female palms; the male falls in love with the female; and if the female be planted at any considerable distance, the loving male begins to wither away. The gardener realises what is the cause of the tree’s grief, goes to some slight eminence in the ground, and observes in which direction it is drooping (for it always inclines towards the object of its passion); and when he has discovered this, he is soon able to heal its disease: for he takes a shoot of the female palm and grafts it into the very heart of the male. This refreshes theround the whole circle of gold, and on every feather an eye.” Satyrus, perceiving the trend and object of my discourse, was desirous of assisting me to enlarge further on the subject, and, “Has then Love,” said he, “such mighty power that he is able to inflame even birds?” “Not birds only,” I answered; “that would be no marvel, for you too know that he is winged himself, but creeping snakes and plants too, and I believe even stones as well: at least the loadstone loves the iron, and if it may but see it and touch it, it attracts it towards itself as though possessed of the passion of love. May this not be the kiss of the loving stone and the beloved metal? As for plants, the children of wisdom have a tale to tell, one that I should deem a fable were it not that it was borne out by countrymen; and this it is. Plants, they say, fall in love with one another, and the palm is particularly susceptible to the passion: there are both male and female palms; the male falls in love with the female; and if the female be planted at any considerable distance, the loving male begins to wither away. The gardener realises what is the cause of the tree’s grief, goes to some slight eminence in the ground, and observes in which direction it is drooping (for it always inclines towards the object of its passion); and when he has discovered this, he is soon able to heal its disease: for he takes a shoot of the female palm and grafts it into the very heart of the male. This refreshes the tree’s spirit, and the trunk, which seemed on the point of death, revives and gains new vigour in joy at the embrace of the beloved: it is a kind of vegetable marriage.
 “There is even an example of wedlock between waters, which takes place across the sea. In this case the lover is a river of Elis, the beloved a fountain in Sicily; the river traverses the sea as though it were a plain, and the sea, far from overwhelming the lover’s fresh waters with its salt billows, makes an opening for the river’s flow and thus becomes a sort of watercourse for it; so that it may fairly be said to be the match-maker between the spring Arethusa and the river Alpheus: thus when the Olympic games are in progress, it is the custom for many of those present at the Festival to throw various objects into the waters of the river, and these are borne directly by the river to the beloved, serving as wedding presents. Among reptiles, there is an even more extraordinary mystery of love, because it is not merely the affection of two individuals of the same race towards one another, but that of a member of one species for a member of another. The viper, which is a land snake, has a burning passion for the murry, a snake of the sea, which has the outward appearance indeed of a snake, but is essentially a fish; so when these wish to join together in matrimony, the viper goes down to the shore and hisses seaward, as a signal to the murry, who recognizes it as the agreed sign, and comes out of the water. However, she does not go straight to the bridegroom, knowingtree’s spirit, and the trunk, which seemed on the point of death, revives and gains new vigour in joy at the embrace of the beloved: it is a kind of vegetable marriage. “There is even an example of wedlock between waters, which takes place across the sea. In this case the lover is a river of Elis, the beloved a fountain in Sicily; the river traverses the sea as though it were a plain, and the sea, far from overwhelming the lover’s fresh waters with its salt billows, makes an opening for the river’s flow and thus becomes a sort of watercourse for it; so that it may fairly be said to be the match-maker between the spring Arethusa and the river Alpheus: thus when the Olympic games are in progress, it is the custom for many of those present at the Festival to throw various objects into the waters of the river, and these are borne directly by the river to the beloved, serving as wedding presents. Among reptiles, there is an even more extraordinary mystery of love, because it is not merely the affection of two individuals of the same race towards one another, but that of a member of one species for a member of another. The viper, which is a land snake, has a burning passion for the murry, a snake of the sea, which has the outward appearance indeed of a snake, but is essentially a fish; so when these wish to join together in matrimony, the viper goes down to the shore and hisses seaward, as a signal to the murry, who recognizes it as the agreed sign, and comes out of the water. However, she does not go straight to the bridegroom, knowing that he carries a deathly poison in his fangs, but climbs a rock and waits until he has been able to purify his mouth, and so they stay looking at one another, the lover of the land and the beloved of the sea.
 After the lover has been able to vomit forth that which has so greatly frightened his bride, and she has seen the death spat out on the ground, she comes down from the rock to the mainland and embraces her lover, and is no longer in terror of his kisses.” While recounting all these stories, I kept at the same time glancing at the maiden, to see how she felt while hearing all this talk of love; and there were some indications that she was not listening without pleasure. The gleaming beauty of the peacock seemed to me nothing in comparison with Leucippe’s lovely face; indeed, her beauty was rival of the flowers of the meadow. Her skin was bright with the hue of the narcissus, roses sprang from her cheeks, the dark gleam of her eyes shone like the violet, the ringlets of her hair curled more tightly than the ivy—Leucippe’s whole appearance was that of a flowery meadow. She soon turned and left the garden, as the time for her harp-playing claimed her: but she seemed to me to be still present, as even when she had gone she was able to fix the image of her form in my eyes. So Satyrus and I were then equally well satisfied with ourselves—I for the learned subjects I had been able to discuss, and he because he had given me my starting-cue.that he carries a deathly poison in his fangs, but climbs a rock and waits until he has been able to purify his mouth, and so they stay looking at one another, the lover of the land and the beloved of the sea. After the lover has been able to vomit forth that which has so greatly frightened his bride, and she has seen the death spat out on the ground, she comes down from the rock to the mainland and embraces her lover, and is no longer in terror of his kisses.” While recounting all these stories, I kept at the same time glancing at the maiden, to see how she felt while hearing all this talk of love; and there were some indications that she was not listening without pleasure. The gleaming beauty of the peacock seemed to me nothing in comparison with Leucippe’s lovely face; indeed, her beauty was rival of the flowers of the meadow. Her skin was bright with the hue of the narcissus, roses sprang from her cheeks, the dark gleam of her eyes shone like the violet, the ringlets of her hair curled more tightly than the ivy—Leucippe’s whole appearance was that of a flowery meadow. She soon turned and left the garden, as the time for her harp-playing claimed her: but she seemed to me to be still present, as even when she had gone she was able to fix the image of her form in my eyes. So Satyrus and I were then equally well satisfied with ourselves—I for the learned subjects I had been able to discuss, and he because he had given me my starting-cue.
 Thus congratulating one another we repaired to the maiden’s chamber to hear her play on the harp, for I could not bear, even for a short time, to let her out of my sight. First of all she performed Homer’s fight between the boar and the lion, then she changed to a tenderer strain, her song celebrating the praises of the rose. Neglecting the modulations of the music, one might describe thus the bare theme of the composition: “If Zeus had wished to give the flowers a king, that king would have been the rose; for it is the ornament of the world, the glory of the plants, the eye of all flowers, the meadows’ blush, beauty itself glowing; it has the breath of Love, it is the go-between of Aphrodite; its foliage is of sweet-smelling leaves, it glories in its rustling petals which seem to smile at the approach of the Zephyr.” Thus she sang; but to me it seemed as if I saw that rose upon her lips, as it were a flower converted into the shape of her sweet mouth. Hardly had she ended when the time of dinner was again at hand. It happened at that season to be the festival of Dionysus Lord of the Vintage; for the Tyrians claim him as their own proper deity, singing on the subject Cadmus’ myth, which they relate as the origin of the festival; and this is it.
 In early days men had no wine; neither the dark, fragrant kind, nor that from the Biblian vine, not Maron’s Thracian sort, not Chian “from a Laconian cup,” not the island wine of Icarus, but all these, they said, were derived from Tyrian vines, the original mother of all wines being a plant of their country. There was a certain shepherd noted for his hospitality, just as the Athenians describe Icarus, from whom this Tyrian story derives its origin, so that it almost seems an Attic tale. Dionysus once paid a visit to this herdsman, who set before him the produce of the earth and the result of the strength of his oxen: but their drink was the same as that of the oxen, since vines did not yet exist. Dionysus thanked the herdsman for his kindly cheer, and pledged him in a friendly cup; but his drink was wine. The herdsman, drinking of it, danced for joy, and said to the god: “Where did you get this purple water, my friend? Wherever did you find blood so sweet? For it is not that water which flows on the ground—that, as it descends into the midriff, affords but a faint pleasure, while this delights the sense of smellthey relate as the origin of the festival; and this is it. In early days men had no wine; neither the dark, fragrant kind, nor that from the Biblian vine, not Maron’s Thracian sort, not Chian “from a Laconian cup,” not the island wine of Icarus, but all these, they said, were derived from Tyrian vines, the original mother of all wines being a plant of their country. There was a certain shepherd noted for his hospitality, just as the Athenians describe Icarus, from whom this Tyrian story derives its origin, so that it almost seems an Attic tale. Dionysus once paid a visit to this herdsman, who set before him the produce of the earth and the result of the strength of his oxen: but their drink was the same as that of the oxen, since vines did not yet exist. Dionysus thanked the herdsman for his kindly cheer, and pledged him in a friendly cup; but his drink was wine. The herdsman, drinking of it, danced for joy, and said to the god: “Where did you get this purple water, my friend? Wherever did you find blood so sweet? For it is not that water which flows on the ground—that, as it descends into the midriff, affords but a faint pleasure, while this delights the sense of smell before ever it reaches the mouth; when you touch it, it is cold, but it leaps down into the belly and there, far down, lights up the fires of delight.
 ” “This,” said Dionysus, “is harvest water, the blood of the grape”: then the god led the herdsman to the vine, and took hold of the clusters and squeezed them; and then, pointing to the vine, “Here is your water,” said he, “this is its source.” That is the way in which wine came to men, as the Tyrian story goes, (3) and they keep that day as Dionysus’ festival. My father, wishing to celebrate it with splendour, had set out all that was necessary for the dinner in a rich and costly fashion; but especially a precious cup to be used for libations to the god, one only second to the famous goblet of Glaucus of Chios. The material of it was wrought rock-crystal; vines crowned its rim, seeming to grow from the cup itself, their clusters drooped down in every direction: when the cup was empty, each grape seemed green and unripe, but when wine was poured into it, then little by little the clusters became red and dark, the green crop turning into the ripe fruit; Dionysus too was represented hard by the clusters, to be the husbandman of the vine and the vintner. As we drank deeper, I began to look more boldly and with less shame at my sweetheart: Cupid and Dionysus are two of the most violent of the gods, they can grasp the soul and drive it so far towards madness that it loses all restraint; Cupid fires it with the flames which are his attribute, while Dionysus supplies wine which isbefore ever it reaches the mouth; when you touch it, it is cold, but it leaps down into the belly and there, far down, lights up the fires of delight.” “This,” said Dionysus, “is harvest water, the blood of the grape”: then the god led the herdsman to the vine, and took hold of the clusters and squeezed them; and then, pointing to the vine, “Here is your water,” said he, “this is its source.” That is the way in which wine came to men, as the Tyrian story goes, (3) and they keep that day as Dionysus’ festival. My father, wishing to celebrate it with splendour, had set out all that was necessary for the dinner in a rich and costly fashion; but especially a precious cup to be used for libations to the god, one only second to the famous goblet of Glaucus of Chios. The material of it was wrought rock-crystal; vines crowned its rim, seeming to grow from the cup itself, their clusters drooped down in every direction: when the cup was empty, each grape seemed green and unripe, but when wine was poured into it, then little by little the clusters became red and dark, the green crop turning into the ripe fruit; Dionysus too was represented hard by the clusters, to be the husbandman of the vine and the vintner. As we drank deeper, I began to look more boldly and with less shame at my sweetheart: Cupid and Dionysus are two of the most violent of the gods, they can grasp the soul and drive it so far towards madness that it loses all restraint; Cupid fires it with the flames which are his attribute, while Dionysus supplies wine which is as fuel to the fire: for wine is the very sustenance of love.
 She too became more hardy, and scrutinized me more curiously. In this state of affairs ten days passed, but we made no other progress nor ventured further than this duel of eyes. I imparted the whole story to Satyrus and asked for his assistance: he replied that he had perceived how things were before I had told him, but had hesitated to question me since I wanted to hide my feelings; for the secret lover, when questioned, often contracts a hatred of the questioner as if he were offering him some insult. “However,” said he, “things have already of their own accord fallen out to our advantage; for Clio, the serving-maid entrusted with the care of your sweetheart’s chamber, confides in me and regards me as her lover. I hope little by little to be able to wheedle her and make her so favourably disposed to us that she will lend her assistance to the final effort. But as for you, you must not be content with making advances to her with glances of your eyes alone; you must use a direct and outright form of speech. Then bring forward your second line, touch her hand, squeeze a finger, and sigh as you squeeze; if she allows you to do this and seems to approve, your next step is to call her your princess and to kiss her on the neck.” “You are a plausible trainer, I vow,” said I, “for the difficult accomplishment; but I fear that 1 shall prove a backward and cowardly performer.” “Love,” he answered, “tolerates noas fuel to the fire: for wine is the very sustenance of love. She too became more hardy, and scrutinized me more curiously. In this state of affairs ten days passed, but we made no other progress nor ventured further than this duel of eyes. I imparted the whole story to Satyrus and asked for his assistance: he replied that he had perceived how things were before I had told him, but had hesitated to question me since I wanted to hide my feelings; for the secret lover, when questioned, often contracts a hatred of the questioner as if he were offering him some insult. “However,” said he, “things have already of their own accord fallen out to our advantage; for Clio, the serving-maid entrusted with the care of your sweetheart’s chamber, confides in me and regards me as her lover. I hope little by little to be able to wheedle her and make her so favourably disposed to us that she will lend her assistance to the final effort. But as for you, you must not be content with making advances to her with glances of your eyes alone; you must use a direct and outright form of speech. Then bring forward your second line, touch her hand, squeeze a finger, and sigh as you squeeze; if she allows you to do this and seems to approve, your next step is to call her your princess and to kiss her on the neck.” “You are a plausible trainer, I vow,” said I, “for the difficult accomplishment; but I fear that 1 shall prove a backward and cowardly performer.” “Love,” he answered, “tolerates no cowardice at all: look how warlike is his appearance—bow, quiver, arrows, and fire—all of them the furniture of courage and enterprise.
 With such a god as that within you, can you be backward and fearful? Be careful not to give him the lie. However, I will give you an opening: I will distract Clio directly I see the most favourable time for you to be alone and by yourself to have a private conversation with the maiden.” This said, he left the room: when I was by myself, stimulated by Satyrus’ words, I began to screw up my courage for the coming attack. “How long,” said I, “do you mean to keep silent, you coward? Why are you so fearful a soldier of so brave a god? Do you expect the maiden to make the first advances toward you? “Then I went on: “But why cannot you control yourself, fool? Why not love where duty bids you? You have another in the house—a virgin, and fair: love her, look at her, marriage with her is in your power.” I thought that I had persuaded myself, but deep down love answered, as though speaking from my heart: “Ha, insolent, do you dare to take arms and set yourself up to do battle with me? I can fly, I can shoot, 1 can burn, how can you avoid me? If you escape my bow, you cannot escape my fire; and if you can quench my fire by your self-control, I shall yet catch you with my wings.” While I was thus arguing with myself, I unexpectedly found that I was standing in the maiden’s presence, and at the sudden sight of her I turned pale and then blushed red: she was all alone, not even Clio with her. However, I could say nothing incowardice at all: look how warlike is his appearance—bow, quiver, arrows, and fire—all of them the furniture of courage and enterprise. With such a god as that within you, can you be backward and fearful? Be careful not to give him the lie. However, I will give you an opening: I will distract Clio directly I see the most favourable time for you to be alone and by yourself to have a private conversation with the maiden.” This said, he left the room: when I was by myself, stimulated by Satyrus’ words, I began to screw up my courage for the coming attack. “How long,” said I, “do you mean to keep silent, you coward? Why are you so fearful a soldier of so brave a god? Do you expect the maiden to make the first advances toward you? “Then I went on: “But why cannot you control yourself, fool? Why not love where duty bids you? You have another in the house—a virgin, and fair: love her, look at her, marriage with her is in your power.” I thought that I had persuaded myself, but deep down love answered, as though speaking from my heart: “Ha, insolent, do you dare to take arms and set yourself up to do battle with me? I can fly, I can shoot, 1 can burn, how can you avoid me? If you escape my bow, you cannot escape my fire; and if you can quench my fire by your self-control, I shall yet catch you with my wings.” While I was thus arguing with myself, I unexpectedly found that I was standing in the maiden’s presence, and at the sudden sight of her I turned pale and then blushed red: she was all alone, not even Clio with her. However, I could say nothing in my agitation, but did my best with “Greetings, my princess.
 ” She smiled very sweetly, showing through her smile that she understood why I greeted her as my princess, and said: “I your princess? Do not call me by such a name.” “Say not so,” said I: “one of the gods has sold me into captivity to you, as he did Hercules to Omphale.” “Is it Hermes you mean,” said she, “whom Zeus sent to effect the sale? “and burst out laughing. “Hermes, indeed!” I answered. “How can you talk such nonsense, when you know well enough what I mean?” One such repartee led to another, and my good luck helped me. Now it had happened on the day before that while the maiden was playing on her harp, Clio was sitting by her and I myself was walking to and fro: and suddenly a bee flew in from somewhere and stung Clio on the hand, who gave a loud scream. Leucippe jumped up, laid down her harp, examined the wound, and did her best to comfort her, telling her not to complain; for she could ease her of the pain by saying over it a couple of charms which she had learned of a gipsy against the stings of wasps and bees: and she pronounced them, and almost immediately Clio said that she was much better. Well, on this second occasion there happened to be some wasp or bee buzzing about and flying round my face, so I adopted the idea, and putting my hand to my face, pretended that I had been stung and was in pain. The maiden came overmy agitation, but did my best with “Greetings, my princess.” She smiled very sweetly, showing through her smile that she understood why I greeted her as my princess, and said: “I your princess? Do not call me by such a name.” “Say not so,” said I: “one of the gods has sold me into captivity to you, as he did Hercules to Omphale.” “Is it Hermes you mean,” said she, “whom Zeus sent to effect the sale? “and burst out laughing. “Hermes, indeed!” I answered. “How can you talk such nonsense, when you know well enough what I mean?” One such repartee led to another, and my good luck helped me. Now it had happened on the day before that while the maiden was playing on her harp, Clio was sitting by her and I myself was walking to and fro: and suddenly a bee flew in from somewhere and stung Clio on the hand, who gave a loud scream. Leucippe jumped up, laid down her harp, examined the wound, and did her best to comfort her, telling her not to complain; for she could ease her of the pain by saying over it a couple of charms which she had learned of a gipsy against the stings of wasps and bees: and she pronounced them, and almost immediately Clio said that she was much better. Well, on this second occasion there happened to be some wasp or bee buzzing about and flying round my face, so I adopted the idea, and putting my hand to my face, pretended that I had been stung and was in pain. The maiden came over to me, drew my hand away, and asked me where the sting was: “On the lip,” said I: “will you not repeat the charm, my dearest?” She came close to me and put her mouth close to mine, so as to work the charm, and murmured something while she touched the tip of my lips; and I gently kissed her, avoiding all the noise of an ordinary salute, until, in the successive opening and shutting of her lips as she murmured it, she converted the charm into a series of kisses: then at last I actually threw my arms round her and kissed her fully without further pretence.
 At this she started back, crying: “What are you doing? Are you saying a charm too?” “No,” said I, “I am kissing the charmer who has cured me of my pain.” As she did not misunderstand my words, and smiled, I plucked up my courage and went on: “Ah, my dearest, I am stung again, and worse: this time the wound has reached my heart and needs your charm to heal it. I think you must have a bee on your lips, so full of honey are you, and your kisses sting. I implore you to repeat your charm once more, and do not hurry over it and make the wound worse again.” So speaking, I put my arm more boldly round her and kissed her with more freedom than before: and she let me do it, while pretending to resist. At that moment we saw her serving-maid approaching from a distance and sprang apart: with me it went much against the grain and to my displeasure—what her feelings were I do not know. This experience made me feel less unhappy, and I began to be full of hope: I felt as if the kiss, like some material object, were still on my lips and preserved it jealously, keeping it as a kind of treasuryto me, drew my hand away, and asked me where the sting was: “On the lip,” said I: “will you not repeat the charm, my dearest?” She came close to me and put her mouth close to mine, so as to work the charm, and murmured something while she touched the tip of my lips; and I gently kissed her, avoiding all the noise of an ordinary salute, until, in the successive opening and shutting of her lips as she murmured it, she converted the charm into a series of kisses: then at last I actually threw my arms round her and kissed her fully without further pretence. At this she started back, crying: “What are you doing? Are you saying a charm too?” “No,” said I, “I am kissing the charmer who has cured me of my pain.” As she did not misunderstand my words, and smiled, I plucked up my courage and went on: “Ah, my dearest, I am stung again, and worse: this time the wound has reached my heart and needs your charm to heal it. I think you must have a bee on your lips, so full of honey are you, and your kisses sting. I implore you to repeat your charm once more, and do not hurry over it and make the wound worse again.” So speaking, I put my arm more boldly round her and kissed her with more freedom than before: and she let me do it, while pretending to resist. At that moment we saw her serving-maid approaching from a distance and sprang apart: with me it went much against the grain and to my displeasure—what her feelings were I do not know. This experience made me feel less unhappy, and I began to be full of hope: I felt as if the kiss, like some material object, were still on my lips and preserved it jealously, keeping it as a kind of treasury of delight; the kiss is the lover’s first favour.
 It is of the fairest part of the whole body—the mouth, which is the instrument of the voice, and the voice is the reflection of the soul. When lovers’ lips meet and mingle together they send down a stream of pleasure beneath the breast and draw up the soul to the lips. I know that never before this did I feel such pleasure in my inmost heart: then for the first time I learned that there is no pleasure on earth comparable with a lover’s kiss. When the time for dinner came, we drank with one another as before. Satyrus was serving the wine, and he devised a trick such as lovers enjoy. He exchanged our cups, giving mine to Leucippe and hers to me, after he had put in the wine and made the mixture: I had observed which part of the cup she had touched when drinking, and then set my own lips upon the same place when I drank myself, so that as my mouth touched the brim I seemed to be sending her a kiss by proxy: when she saw this, she comprehended at once that I was glad enough to kiss even the shadow of her lips. Presently Satyrus once more stole away the cups and again exchanged them: then I saw her copying my procedure and drinking from the same spot where I had drunk, and at this 1 was still more delighted. This happened a third and a fourth time, and indeed for the rest of that evening we were thus pledging kisses to one another. When the dinner was over Satyrus came up to me and said: “Now is the time to playof delight; the kiss is the lover’s first favour. It is of the fairest part of the whole body—the mouth, which is the instrument of the voice, and the voice is the reflection of the soul. When lovers’ lips meet and mingle together they send down a stream of pleasure beneath the breast and draw up the soul to the lips. I know that never before this did I feel such pleasure in my inmost heart: then for the first time I learned that there is no pleasure on earth comparable with a lover’s kiss. When the time for dinner came, we drank with one another as before. Satyrus was serving the wine, and he devised a trick such as lovers enjoy. He exchanged our cups, giving mine to Leucippe and hers to me, after he had put in the wine and made the mixture: I had observed which part of the cup she had touched when drinking, and then set my own lips upon the same place when I drank myself, so that as my mouth touched the brim I seemed to be sending her a kiss by proxy: when she saw this, she comprehended at once that I was glad enough to kiss even the shadow of her lips. Presently Satyrus once more stole away the cups and again exchanged them: then I saw her copying my procedure and drinking from the same spot where I had drunk, and at this 1 was still more delighted. This happened a third and a fourth time, and indeed for the rest of that evening we were thus pledging kisses to one another. When the dinner was over Satyrus came up to me and said: “Now is the time to play the man.
 Your sweetheart’s mother, as you know, is not in good health and is gone to rest alone: while Leucippe will take a stroll, before retiring to sleep, with no other escort than her maid Clio, her regular attendant: I will fall into conversation with Clio and lead her apart.” Acting on this suggestion, we lay in wait for them, I devoting my energies to the maiden, and he to Clio: and all turned out well; Clio disappeared, and Leucippe was left walking in the court. I thus bided my time until the greater part of the sun’s light was obscured, and then advanced to the attack, a bolder man since the success of my first onslaught, like a soldier that has already gained the victory and made light of war: for the arms that gave me such confidence were not a few—wine, love, hope, solitude: so that I uttered never a word, but without other preliminaries, as if all had been arranged between us beforehand, I threw my arms round her and kissed her. I was even beginning to make further advances, when we suddenly heard a noise behind us, and in our anxiety jumped apart: she retired to her chamber and I to the other part of the house, very angry at the spoiling of such a good beginning, and cursing the noise. While so engaged Satyrus met me with a smiling face: it appeared that he had seen all our proceedings, hiding behind some bushes in case anybody should come; and it was he that had made the noise, because he had seen someone approaching.the man. Your sweetheart’s mother, as you know, is not in good health and is gone to rest alone: while Leucippe will take a stroll, before retiring to sleep, with no other escort than her maid Clio, her regular attendant: I will fall into conversation with Clio and lead her apart.” Acting on this suggestion, we lay in wait for them, I devoting my energies to the maiden, and he to Clio: and all turned out well; Clio disappeared, and Leucippe was left walking in the court. I thus bided my time until the greater part of the sun’s light was obscured, and then advanced to the attack, a bolder man since the success of my first onslaught, like a soldier that has already gained the victory and made light of war: for the arms that gave me such confidence were not a few—wine, love, hope, solitude: so that I uttered never a word, but without other preliminaries, as if all had been arranged between us beforehand, I threw my arms round her and kissed her. I was even beginning to make further advances, when we suddenly heard a noise behind us, and in our anxiety jumped apart: she retired to her chamber and I to the other part of the house, very angry at the spoiling of such a good beginning, and cursing the noise. While so engaged Satyrus met me with a smiling face: it appeared that he had seen all our proceedings, hiding behind some bushes in case anybody should come; and it was he that had made the noise, because he had seen someone approaching.
 A few days later, my father began to push on the preparations for my marriage with more haste than lie had originally intended, because he was being troubled by frequent dreams. He thought that he was conducting our marriage ceremonies, and had already lit the torches, when the fire was suddenly put out \[and, what disturbed him even more deeply, both Calligone and I vanished\]. This made him in the greater hurry to unite us, and preparations were made for the wedding to be on the following day. All the bridal ornaments had been bought for the maiden: she had a necklace of various precious stones and a dress of which the whole ground was purple; where, on ordinary dresses there would be braidings of purple, on this they were of gold. In the necklace the gems seemed at rivalry with one another; there was a jacinth that might be described as a rose crystallized in stone and an amethyst that shone so brightly that it seemed akin to gold; in between were three stones of graded colours, all mounted together, forming a gem black at the base, white streaked with black in the middle, and the white shaded off into red at the top: the whole jewel was encircled with gold and presented the appearance of a golden eye. As for the dress, the purple with which it was dyed was no casual tint, but that kind which (according to the story the Tyrians tell) was discovered by the shepherd’s dog, with which they dye Aphrodite’s robe to this day.
 There was once a time, you must know, when purple was still an ornament forbidden to men; it lay concealed in the round cavity of a tiny shell. A fisherman captured some of these; he at first thought that he had obtained some fish, but when he saw that the shell was rough and hard, he was vexed with what he had caught, and threw it away as the mere offal of the sea. A dog found this windfall, and crunched it with its teeth; the blood of the dye streamed all over the dog’s mouth, staining its muzzle and indelibly imprinting the purple on its lips. The shepherd, seeing his dog’s lips thus blood-stained, thought that the colour arose from a wound, and went and washed it in sea-water; but the blood only shone the brighter, and when he touched it with his hands, some of the purple appeared on the hand. He then realised the character of the shell, how it contained within it a medicament of great beauty; he took a fleece of wool and pressed it into the interior of the shell, trying to find out its secret; and the wool too appeared as though blood-stained, like the dog’s muzzle; thence he learned the appearance of the dye. He therefore took some stones and broke the outer shell which hid the substance, opened the hiding-place of the purple, and thus discovered what was a very treasury of dye.to this day. There was once a time, you must know, when purple was still an ornament forbidden to men; it lay concealed in the round cavity of a tiny shell. A fisherman captured some of these; he at first thought that he had obtained some fish, but when he saw that the shell was rough and hard, he was vexed with what he had caught, and threw it away as the mere offal of the sea. A dog found this windfall, and crunched it with its teeth; the blood of the dye streamed all over the dog’s mouth, staining its muzzle and indelibly imprinting the purple on its lips. The shepherd, seeing his dog’s lips thus blood-stained, thought that the colour arose from a wound, and went and washed it in sea-water; but the blood only shone the brighter, and when he touched it with his hands, some of the purple appeared on the hand. He then realised the character of the shell, how it contained within it a medicament of great beauty; he took a fleece of wool and pressed it into the interior of the shell, trying to find out its secret; and the wool too appeared as though blood-stained, like the dog’s muzzle; thence he learned the appearance of the dye. He therefore took some stones and broke the outer shell which hid the substance, opened the hiding-place of the purple, and thus discovered what was a very treasury of dye.
 My father then began to perform the sacrifices which are the necessary preliminaries to a wedding; and when 1 heard of this, I gave myself up for lost and began to look for some excuse to defer it, While I was thus engaged, a sudden tumult arose throughout the men’s part of the house: and this was what had occurred. My father was in the act of sacrificing, and had just placed the victims upon the altar, when an eagle swooped down from above and carried off the offering. It was of no avail that those present tried to scare him away; he flew off carrying away his prey. Now this seemed to bode no good, so that they postponed the wedding for that day: my father called in soothsayers and augurs and related the omen to them; and they answered that he must perform a sacrifice at midnight to Zeus as god of strangers upon the sea-shore, for that was the direction in which the bird had flown. \[And that was the end of the matter: for it had indeed so chanced that the eagle had flown seaward and appeared no more.\] At all this I was greatly delighted with the eagle, and I remarked that it was certainly true that the eagle was the king of all birds. Nor was it long before the event followed the prodigy which had foreshadowed it. There was a certain youth of Byzantium, named Callisthenes. His father and mother were dead; he was rich, but profligate and extravagant. He, hearing that Sostratus had a beautiful daughter, wished, although he had never seen her, to make her his wife, and became her lover by hearsay; for such is the lack of self-control in the lewd, that they are led into the passion of love by means of their ears, and report has the same effect upon them as the ministry of the love-smitten eyes, acting upon the mind, has upon others.
 Before, then, the war broke out in which the Byzantines were engaged, he approached Sostratus, and asked him for his daughter’s hand, but Sostratus refused it because he loathed Callisthenes’ loose life. This enraged him, not only because he considered himself slighted by Sostratus, but because he actually was in love: for he pictured in his imagination the beauty of the maiden, conceiving inwardly that which he had never seen, and in this manner he fell, before he knew where he was, into a very bitter state of mind. The result was that he began to plot how he might at the same time be revenged upon Sostratus for the injury and accomplish his own desires; and to this end he purposed to have recourse to a law of the Byzantines, to the effect that if a man carried off a virgin and instantly made her his wife, the penalty exacted was simply the fact of the marriage itself: so that he began to look about for an occasion to accomplish his ends. Meanwhile the war broke out and the maiden came to live with us, but his knowledge of these facts did not restrain him from his plotting. He was assisted by the following circumstance; an oracle was current among the Byzantines to this effect:— “There is an island city: they who dwell Therein are named from trees. It makes as wellthey are led into the passion of love by means of their ears, and report has the same effect upon them as the ministry of the love-smitten eyes, acting upon the mind, has upon others. Before, then, the war broke out in which the Byzantines were engaged, he approached Sostratus, and asked him for his daughter’s hand, but Sostratus refused it because he loathed Callisthenes’ loose life. This enraged him, not only because he considered himself slighted by Sostratus, but because he actually was in love: for he pictured in his imagination the beauty of the maiden, conceiving inwardly that which he had never seen, and in this manner he fell, before he knew where he was, into a very bitter state of mind. The result was that he began to plot how he might at the same time be revenged upon Sostratus for the injury and accomplish his own desires; and to this end he purposed to have recourse to a law of the Byzantines, to the effect that if a man carried off a virgin and instantly made her his wife, the penalty exacted was simply the fact of the marriage itself: so that he began to look about for an occasion to accomplish his ends. Meanwhile the war broke out and the maiden came to live with us, but his knowledge of these facts did not restrain him from his plotting. He was assisted by the following circumstance; an oracle was current among the Byzantines to this effect:— “There is an island city: they who dwell Therein are named from trees. It makes as well An isthmus on the sea, a bay on shore, Where, to Hephaestus’ joy, for evermore Consorts with him Athene, grey-eyed maid.
 There let your rites to Hercules be paid.” Now they had no idea what the oracle meant; but Sostratus, who was, as I said, one of the generals in the war, spoke as follows: “It is time,” said he, “to send to Tyre and sacrifice to Hercules: the particulars of the oracle all agree with that spot. The god called it ‘named from trees,’ because it is an island belonging to the Phoenicians, and the phoenix-palm is a tree. It is a subject of contention to both land and sea, the sea striving for it in one direction, the land in the other; but it partakes of both, for it is founded in the sea and is yet not disconnected with the shore: there is a narrow strip of land which joins it to the mainland, forming a kind of neck to the island. Nor is it rooted to the bottom of the sea, but the water flows beneath it, and also beneath the isthmus, so that it presents the curious spectacle of a city in the sea and an island on land. As for the expression of ’ Hephaestus consorting with Athene,’ the riddling allusion is to the connection of the olive with fire, which are also found in company in our own country. There is there a sacred piece of ground walled in, where the olive grows with its gleaming foliage, and there isAn isthmus on the sea, a bay on shore, Where, to Hephaestus’ joy, for evermore Consorts with him Athene, grey-eyed maid. There let your rites to Hercules be paid.” Now they had no idea what the oracle meant; but Sostratus, who was, as I said, one of the generals in the war, spoke as follows: “It is time,” said he, “to send to Tyre and sacrifice to Hercules: the particulars of the oracle all agree with that spot. The god called it ‘named from trees,’ because it is an island belonging to the Phoenicians, and the phoenix-palm is a tree. It is a subject of contention to both land and sea, the sea striving for it in one direction, the land in the other; but it partakes of both, for it is founded in the sea and is yet not disconnected with the shore: there is a narrow strip of land which joins it to the mainland, forming a kind of neck to the island. Nor is it rooted to the bottom of the sea, but the water flows beneath it, and also beneath the isthmus, so that it presents the curious spectacle of a city in the sea and an island on land. As for the expression of ’ Hephaestus consorting with Athene,’ the riddling allusion is to the connection of the olive with fire, which are also found in company in our own country. There is there a sacred piece of ground walled in, where the olive grows with its gleaming foliage, and there is also fire in the ground which sends up a great blaze among the branches, the soot of which manures the trees.
 This is the affection existing between the fire and the plant, and it may thus be said that Athene flees not from Hephaestus.” Chaerephon, who was a fellow-general with Sostratus of superior rank, was a native of Tyre on his father’s side, and congratulated him on his interpretation. “You have explained the whole oracle admirably,” said he: “but it is not fire only, but water as well, which has properties not unworthy of wonder. I myself have seen some of these miraculous sights: there is, for example, a spring in Sicily which has fire mixed with its waters; if you look down you can see the flame shooting up from beneath, and yet if you touch the water it is as cold as snow: the fire is not put out by the water, nor is the water heated by the fire, but a truce reigns in the spring between the two elements. Then there is a river in Spain which does not seem at first sight different from any other river; but if you wish to hear the water talking, open your ears and wait a little: for if a gentle breeze strikes its eddies, the water thrills like a string: the wind acts as a plectrum upon the water, and the water sings like a lyre. Again, there is in Libya a lake which may be compared toalso fire in the ground which sends up a great blaze among the branches, the soot of which manures the trees. This is the affection existing between the fire and the plant, and it may thus be said that Athene flees not from Hephaestus.” Chaerephon, who was a fellow-general with Sostratus of superior rank, was a native of Tyre on his father’s side, and congratulated him on his interpretation. “You have explained the whole oracle admirably,” said he: “but it is not fire only, but water as well, which has properties not unworthy of wonder. I myself have seen some of these miraculous sights: there is, for example, a spring in Sicily which has fire mixed with its waters; if you look down you can see the flame shooting up from beneath, and yet if you touch the water it is as cold as snow: the fire is not put out by the water, nor is the water heated by the fire, but a truce reigns in the spring between the two elements. Then there is a river in Spain which does not seem at first sight different from any other river; but if you wish to hear the water talking, open your ears and wait a little: for if a gentle breeze strikes its eddies, the water thrills like a string: the wind acts as a plectrum upon the water, and the water sings like a lyre. Again, there is in Libya a lake which may be compared to the soil of India: the Libyan maidens know its secret, that its water contains a store of wealth; this is preserved below as in a treasury, being intermingled with the mud of the lake, which is a very spring of gold.
 So they smear with pitch the end of a pole and thrust it down beneath the water: thus they open its concealed store-house, the pole being with respect to the gold what the hook is to a fish, for it does the fishing, while the pitch acts as bait; since all the gold which touches it (and nothing else) sticks to it and thus the pitch draws its capture to the land. That is the manner of the gold fisheries in this Libyan stream.” After thus speaking, Chaerephon gave his opinion in favour of sending the sacrifice to be performed at Tyre, and the city also agreed. Callisthenes was successful in getting himself appointed one of the envoys, and at once, after arriving at Tyre by sea and finding out where my father lived, laid his snares for the women. They had gone out to see the sacrifice, which was indeed a very sumptuous affair: there was a great variety of different kinds of burnt perfumes, and many different nosegays of flowers; of the former, cinnamon, frankincense, and saffron; of the latter, jonquil, rose, and myrtle; the smell of the flowers competed with the scent of the perfumes, and the breeze as it travelled up into the air mingled the two together, so that it formed a gale of delight. The victims were many in number and various in kind: conspicuous among them were the cattle from the Nile.the soil of India: the Libyan maidens know its secret, that its water contains a store of wealth; this is preserved below as in a treasury, being intermingled with the mud of the lake, which is a very spring of gold. So they smear with pitch the end of a pole and thrust it down beneath the water: thus they open its concealed store-house, the pole being with respect to the gold what the hook is to a fish, for it does the fishing, while the pitch acts as bait; since all the gold which touches it (and nothing else) sticks to it and thus the pitch draws its capture to the land. That is the manner of the gold fisheries in this Libyan stream.” After thus speaking, Chaerephon gave his opinion in favour of sending the sacrifice to be performed at Tyre, and the city also agreed. Callisthenes was successful in getting himself appointed one of the envoys, and at once, after arriving at Tyre by sea and finding out where my father lived, laid his snares for the women. They had gone out to see the sacrifice, which was indeed a very sumptuous affair: there was a great variety of different kinds of burnt perfumes, and many different nosegays of flowers; of the former, cinnamon, frankincense, and saffron; of the latter, jonquil, rose, and myrtle; the smell of the flowers competed with the scent of the perfumes, and the breeze as it travelled up into the air mingled the two together, so that it formed a gale of delight. The victims were many in number and various in kind: conspicuous among them were the cattle from the Nile.
 For the Egyptian ox is especially favoured, both in bulk and in colouring: he is of very great size, with a brawny neck, a broad back, a great belly, horns neither small like those of the Sicilian cattle, nor ugly like those from Cyprus; but they spring up straight from the forehead, bending outward a little on either side, and their tips are the same distance apart as their roots, giving the appearance of the moon coming to the full: their colour is like that for which Homer so greatly commends the horses of the Thracian. The bull paces with neck well lifted up, as though he would shew that he was the king of all other cattle. If the story of Europa be true, Zeus put on the appearance of an Egyptian bull. It so happened that at that time my mother was in delicate health: and Leucippe also pretended that she was ill and remained indoors, for by such means it was arranged by us to contrive to meet, while the others were away: the result of this was my sister went out to the spectacle with Leucippe’s mother alone. Callisthenes, who had never set eyes on Leucippe, when he saw my sister Calligone, thought that she was Leucippe, because he recognized Sostratus’ wife; without asking any questions, for he was carried away by the sight of her, he pointed her out to his most trusty servant, bidding him get together a band of robbers to carry her off, and instructed him how the attempt was to be made: a holiday was near at hand, on which, he had heard, it was customary for all the maidens of the place to come together on the sea-shore.
 After giving these instructions, and after performing the sacrifice for which he had formed part of the embassy, he retired. He had a vessel of his own—he had made all these preparations at home, in case he should succeed in such an attempt: so when the rest of the envoys sailed off, he weighed anchor and rode a little off the land, waiting in order that he might seem to be accompanying his fellow-citizens on their homeward journey, and that after the carrying off of the girl his vessel might not be too close to Tyre and so himself be taken in the act. When he had arrived at Sarepta, a Tyrian village on the sea-board, he acquired a small boat and entrusted it to Zeno; that was the name of the servant in whose charge he had placed the abduction—a fellow of a robust body and the nature of a brigand. Zeno picked up with all speed some fishermen from that village who were really pirates as well, and with them sailed away for Tyre: the boat came to anchor, waiting in ambush, in a little creek in a small island not far from Tyre, which the Tyrians call Rhodope’s Tomb. However, the omen of the eagle and the soothsayers happened before the holiday for which Callisthenes was waiting, and for the next day we made the prescribed preparations at night for sacrificingfor he was carried away by the sight of her, he pointed her out to his most trusty servant, bidding him get together a band of robbers to carry her off, and instructed him how the attempt was to be made: a holiday was near at hand, on which, he had heard, it was customary for all the maidens of the place to come together on the sea-shore. After giving these instructions, and after performing the sacrifice for which he had formed part of the embassy, he retired. He had a vessel of his own—he had made all these preparations at home, in case he should succeed in such an attempt: so when the rest of the envoys sailed off, he weighed anchor and rode a little off the land, waiting in order that he might seem to be accompanying his fellow-citizens on their homeward journey, and that after the carrying off of the girl his vessel might not be too close to Tyre and so himself be taken in the act. When he had arrived at Sarepta, a Tyrian village on the sea-board, he acquired a small boat and entrusted it to Zeno; that was the name of the servant in whose charge he had placed the abduction—a fellow of a robust body and the nature of a brigand. Zeno picked up with all speed some fishermen from that village who were really pirates as well, and with them sailed away for Tyre: the boat came to anchor, waiting in ambush, in a little creek in a small island not far from Tyre, which the Tyrians call Rhodope’s Tomb. However, the omen of the eagle and the soothsayers happened before the holiday for which Callisthenes was waiting, and for the next day we made the prescribed preparations at night for sacrificing to the god.
 Nothing of all this escaped Zeno’s notice: when evening was now far advanced, we went forth, and he was following us. Hardly had we arrived at the water’s edge, when he hoisted the preconcerted signal; the boat rapidly sailed toward the shore, and when it had come close, it was apparent that it contained ten youths. They had already secretly posted eight others on land, dressed like women and with their faces closely shaved of all hair; each was wearing under his gown a sword, and they too carried a sacrifice in order to avoid all suspicion: we thought that they were women. No sooner had we raised our pyre, when they suddenly gave a shout, ran all together upon us, and put out our torches; and as we fled, all in disorder from the sudden surprise, they drew their swords, seized my sister, put her aboard the boat, quickly embarked themselves, and were off like a bird. Some of our party were flying, knowing and seeing nothing; others did see, and cried out, “Calligone has been carried off by brigands.” Their boat, however, was already far out at sea. When they began to approach Sarepta, Callisthenes observed their signal from a distance; he sailed to meet them, put the girl on board his ship, and quickly sailed for the open sea. I felt a great relief at my wedding being thus all unexpectedly made impossible, and yet at the same time I was of course much distressed at the way this great disaster had befallen my sister.to the god. Nothing of all this escaped Zeno’s notice: when evening was now far advanced, we went forth, and he was following us. Hardly had we arrived at the water’s edge, when he hoisted the preconcerted signal; the boat rapidly sailed toward the shore, and when it had come close, it was apparent that it contained ten youths. They had already secretly posted eight others on land, dressed like women and with their faces closely shaved of all hair; each was wearing under his gown a sword, and they too carried a sacrifice in order to avoid all suspicion: we thought that they were women. No sooner had we raised our pyre, when they suddenly gave a shout, ran all together upon us, and put out our torches; and as we fled, all in disorder from the sudden surprise, they drew their swords, seized my sister, put her aboard the boat, quickly embarked themselves, and were off like a bird. Some of our party were flying, knowing and seeing nothing; others did see, and cried out, “Calligone has been carried off by brigands.” Their boat, however, was already far out at sea. When they began to approach Sarepta, Callisthenes observed their signal from a distance; he sailed to meet them, put the girl on board his ship, and quickly sailed for the open sea. I felt a great relief at my wedding being thus all unexpectedly made impossible, and yet at the same time I was of course much distressed at the way this great disaster had befallen my sister.
 After a few days had elapsed, I said to Leucippe:” How long, my dearest, are we to stop at kisses? Favourable is such a beginning! Let us add to them something with real love in it. Let us fetter one another with an indissoluble bond; for if but once Aphrodite initiate us into her mysteries, no other god will ever prove stronger than she.” By constantly reiterating my request, I had persuaded the maiden to receive me one night in her chamber, with the connivance of Clio, who was her chambermaid. This was how her chamber lay: there was a large wing of the house divided into four rooms, two on the right and two on the left, separated by a narrow passage down the middle; there was a single door at the beginning of the passage, which was usually locked. This was the abode the women used. The two inner rooms opposite one another belonged to the maiden and her mother; as for the two outer rooms nearer the entrance, the one next to Leucippe’s was occupied by Clio, and the other was used as the steward’s store. Her mother was in the habit, when she put Leucippe to bed, of locking the passage door from the inside, and somebody else would also lock it from the outside and pass the keys through the hole; she used to take and keep them, and in the morning, calling the servant whose business this was, she would pass the keys back again for him to open the door.
 Satyrus obtained a duplicate set of these keys and experimented with unlocking the door; finding that this was practicable, he persuaded Clio, with the maiden’s consent, to raise no objections to our plan. Such, then, were the arrangements we had made. There was one of their servants called Conops—a meddlesome, talkative, greedy rascal, deserving any bad name you liked to call him, I noticed that he seemed to be watching from a distance all that we were about; and being particularly suspicious that we were intending (as was indeed the case) to make some attempt by night, he would constantly sit up until very late, leaving open the doors of his room, so that it was a difficult business to escape him. Satyrus, wishing to conciliate him, used often to joke with him, calling him the Conops or Gnat, and good-humouredly punned upon his name; he saw through the device, and while he pretended to make jokes in return, he shewed in his humour his cross-grained and intractable nature. “Since,” said he, “you even mock at my name, allow me to relate to you a fable derived from the gnat. “The lion often used to complain to Prometheus that he had made him great and handsome, that he had armed his jaw with teeth and made his feet strong with claws, and made him stronger than all the other beasts: ’ And yet,’ he would say,from the outside and pass the keys through the hole; she used to take and keep them, and in the morning, calling the servant whose business this was, she would pass the keys back again for him to open the door. Satyrus obtained a duplicate set of these keys and experimented with unlocking the door; finding that this was practicable, he persuaded Clio, with the maiden’s consent, to raise no objections to our plan. Such, then, were the arrangements we had made. There was one of their servants called Conops—a meddlesome, talkative, greedy rascal, deserving any bad name you liked to call him, I noticed that he seemed to be watching from a distance all that we were about; and being particularly suspicious that we were intending (as was indeed the case) to make some attempt by night, he would constantly sit up until very late, leaving open the doors of his room, so that it was a difficult business to escape him. Satyrus, wishing to conciliate him, used often to joke with him, calling him the Conops or Gnat, and good-humouredly punned upon his name; he saw through the device, and while he pretended to make jokes in return, he shewed in his humour his cross-grained and intractable nature. “Since,” said he, “you even mock at my name, allow me to relate to you a fable derived from the gnat. “The lion often used to complain to Prometheus that he had made him great and handsome, that he had armed his jaw with teeth and made his feet strong with claws, and made him stronger than all the other beasts: ’ And yet,’ he would say, ‘powerful as I am, I am terrified of a cock.
 ’ ‘Why thus blame me in vain?’ said Prometheus, his attention thus attracted to the matter: ‘you have everything that I could give you at the moment of creation: your spirit is feeble in this one respect.’ The lion wept much at his evil case and cursed his cowardice and at last determined to slay himself: but while he was in this frame of mind, he happened to meet the elephant, and after hailing him, stopped gossiping with him. He noticed that his ears kept moving the whole time, and asked him: ‘What is the matter with you? Why is it that your ear never keeps still even for a moment?’ It so chanced that at that instant a gnat was flying about him, and the elephant replied: ‘Do you see this tiny little buzzing creature? If once it were to get into the channel through which I hear, it would be the death of me.’ ‘Well,’ said the lion, ’there is surely no reason for me to die after all, seeing that I am big enough and as much better off than the elephant, as the cock is a nobler creature than the gnat.’ You see then how powerful is the gnat, so that even the elephant is afraid of him.” Satyrus understood the innuendo that lay beneath this story, and, with a slight smile, “Listen,” said he, “to a fable of mine as well, taken from the gnat and the lion, which I once heard from a learned man: and I will make you a present of the elephant of your story. “The rascally braggart gnat said one day to the lion: ‘I suppose that you think that you are king over me as over all other beasts? But you have‘powerful as I am, I am terrified of a cock.’ ‘Why thus blame me in vain?’ said Prometheus, his attention thus attracted to the matter: ‘you have everything that I could give you at the moment of creation: your spirit is feeble in this one respect.’ The lion wept much at his evil case and cursed his cowardice and at last determined to slay himself: but while he was in this frame of mind, he happened to meet the elephant, and after hailing him, stopped gossiping with him. He noticed that his ears kept moving the whole time, and asked him: ‘What is the matter with you? Why is it that your ear never keeps still even for a moment?’ It so chanced that at that instant a gnat was flying about him, and the elephant replied: ‘Do you see this tiny little buzzing creature? If once it were to get into the channel through which I hear, it would be the death of me.’ ‘Well,’ said the lion, ’there is surely no reason for me to die after all, seeing that I am big enough and as much better off than the elephant, as the cock is a nobler creature than the gnat.’ You see then how powerful is the gnat, so that even the elephant is afraid of him.” Satyrus understood the innuendo that lay beneath this story, and, with a slight smile, “Listen,” said he, “to a fable of mine as well, taken from the gnat and the lion, which I once heard from a learned man: and I will make you a present of the elephant of your story. “The rascally braggart gnat said one day to the lion: ‘I suppose that you think that you are king over me as over all other beasts? But you have not better looks than I, or more courage or even greatness.
 What, in the first place, is your courage? You scratch with your claws and bite with your teeth: and so does any woman when she fights. Then what about your size or your looks of which you are so proud? You have a broad chest, muscular shoulders and plenty of hair about your neck: but you cannot see what a wretched sight you are from behind. greatness is that of the whole air which is traversed by my wings, and my beauty is the flowers of the meadows, which are as it were my garments which I put on when I am tired of flying. I fear it will make you laugh to hear all the catalogue of my valour: I am wholly an instrument of war; I am ready for the fray at the sound of the trumpet, and my mouth being at once trumpet and weapon I am both bandsman and archer. I am at once my own arrow and my own bow; my wings shoot me through the air, and as I pounce I make a wound like an arrow: the person who is struck suddenly cries out and looks for him who dealt the wound. I am there and not there: at the same moment I retire and advance: I use my wings as cavalry use their horses to circle round the man I am attacking; and I laugh at him when I see him dancing with the pain of my wounds. But what need of words? Let us begin the battle.’ So speaking, he fell upon the lion, alighting upon his eyes and any other part of his face that was unprotected by hair, flying around and at the same timenot better looks than I, or more courage or even greatness. What, in the first place, is your courage? You scratch with your claws and bite with your teeth: and so does any woman when she fights. Then what about your size or your looks of which you are so proud? You have a broad chest, muscular shoulders and plenty of hair about your neck: but you cannot see what a wretched sight you are from behind. greatness is that of the whole air which is traversed by my wings, and my beauty is the flowers of the meadows, which are as it were my garments which I put on when I am tired of flying. I fear it will make you laugh to hear all the catalogue of my valour: I am wholly an instrument of war; I am ready for the fray at the sound of the trumpet, and my mouth being at once trumpet and weapon I am both bandsman and archer. I am at once my own arrow and my own bow; my wings shoot me through the air, and as I pounce I make a wound like an arrow: the person who is struck suddenly cries out and looks for him who dealt the wound. I am there and not there: at the same moment I retire and advance: I use my wings as cavalry use their horses to circle round the man I am attacking; and I laugh at him when I see him dancing with the pain of my wounds. But what need of words? Let us begin the battle.’ So speaking, he fell upon the lion, alighting upon his eyes and any other part of his face that was unprotected by hair, flying around and at the same time piping with his drone.
 The lion began to be furious, jumping round in every direction and making empty bites at the air: then the gnat all the more made sport of his anger, and wounded him actually on the lips. The lion turned towards the direction in which he was hurt, bending over to where he felt the blow of the wound, but the gnat, like a wrestler, prepared his body against the hold and slipped out of the snap of the lion’s teeth, and flew clean through the middle of his jaw as it closed, so that his teeth clashed idly against one another. By this time the lion was tired out with fighting vainly against the air with his teeth, and stood quite worn out with his own passion, while the gnat hovered round his mane, chanting a song of victory: but as he took a wider sweep of flight in his unmannerly exultation, he became entangled unawares in the meshes of a spider’s web, though the spider was not at all unaware of his arrival. Now unable to escape, he began to cry in despair: ‘Fool that I was: I challenged the lion, while a paltry spider’s web has caught me!’ ” Thus did Satyr us speak: and, “Now,” said he, with a smile, “you had better beware of spiders.” After letting a few days pass, he (knowing that Conops was always the slave of his belly) bought a drug of the nature of a strong sleeping-draught, and asked him to dinner. At first he suspected some trick and hesitated: then, his beloved belly being too strong for him, he accepted. He came to Satyrus, and after dinner was just on the point of going away, when Satyrus poured some of the drugpiping with his drone. The lion began to be furious, jumping round in every direction and making empty bites at the air: then the gnat all the more made sport of his anger, and wounded him actually on the lips. The lion turned towards the direction in which he was hurt, bending over to where he felt the blow of the wound, but the gnat, like a wrestler, prepared his body against the hold and slipped out of the snap of the lion’s teeth, and flew clean through the middle of his jaw as it closed, so that his teeth clashed idly against one another. By this time the lion was tired out with fighting vainly against the air with his teeth, and stood quite worn out with his own passion, while the gnat hovered round his mane, chanting a song of victory: but as he took a wider sweep of flight in his unmannerly exultation, he became entangled unawares in the meshes of a spider’s web, though the spider was not at all unaware of his arrival. Now unable to escape, he began to cry in despair: ‘Fool that I was: I challenged the lion, while a paltry spider’s web has caught me!’ ” Thus did Satyr us speak: and, “Now,” said he, with a smile, “you had better beware of spiders.” After letting a few days pass, he (knowing that Conops was always the slave of his belly) bought a drug of the nature of a strong sleeping-draught, and asked him to dinner. At first he suspected some trick and hesitated: then, his beloved belly being too strong for him, he accepted. He came to Satyrus, and after dinner was just on the point of going away, when Satyrus poured some of the drug into his parting glass: he drank it, had just time to get to his own room, and then fell down and lay sleeping a drugged sleep.
 Then Satyrus hurried to me and said: “Your Cyclops is asleep; see that you prove yourself a brave Ulysses.” He was still speaking when we came to my beloved’s door. He left me, and I entered, Clio letting me in on tiptoe, trembling with the double emotion of joy and fear: the fear of the danger we were running troubled the hopes of my heart, while the hope of success dulled with pleasure the fear I had conceived; hope was afraid and apprehension rejoiced. But hardly had I entered the maiden’s chamber, when a strange event befell her mother: she was troubled by a dream in which she saw a robber with a naked sword snatch her daughter from her, throw her down on her back, and then rip her up the middle of the belly with the blade, beginning from the groin. Frightened and disturbed, just as she was, she jumped up and rushed to her daughter’s chamber, which was quite close, when I had but just lain down: I, hearing the noise of the doors opening, leaped quickly up; but she was already at the bed side. Then I understood the mischief, sprang away, and ran through the door-way, where Satyrus was waiting for me, all trembling and disordered as Iinto his parting glass: he drank it, had just time to get to his own room, and then fell down and lay sleeping a drugged sleep. Then Satyrus hurried to me and said: “Your Cyclops is asleep; see that you prove yourself a brave Ulysses.” He was still speaking when we came to my beloved’s door. He left me, and I entered, Clio letting me in on tiptoe, trembling with the double emotion of joy and fear: the fear of the danger we were running troubled the hopes of my heart, while the hope of success dulled with pleasure the fear I had conceived; hope was afraid and apprehension rejoiced. But hardly had I entered the maiden’s chamber, when a strange event befell her mother: she was troubled by a dream in which she saw a robber with a naked sword snatch her daughter from her, throw her down on her back, and then rip her up the middle of the belly with the blade, beginning from the groin. Frightened and disturbed, just as she was, she jumped up and rushed to her daughter’s chamber, which was quite close, when I had but just lain down: I, hearing the noise of the doors opening, leaped quickly up; but she was already at the bed side. Then I understood the mischief, sprang away, and ran through the door-way, where Satyrus was waiting for me, all trembling and disordered as I was: then we fled through the darkness and came to our own rooms.
 Panthea first of all fell down in a swoon: when she recovered, she straightway boxed Clio’s ears and caught her by the hair, at the same time crying out to her daughter: “Leucippe, you have destroyed all my hopes. Ah, my poor Sostratus, you are fighting at Byzantium to protect other people’s marriages, while at Tyre you have already been defeated and another has ravished your daughter’s marriage. Woe is me, Leucippe: I never thought to see your wedding in this wise: would that you had remained at Byzantium; would that you had suffered violence after the custom of war; yes, would even that a conquering Thracian had been your ravisher: a misfortune brought about by force does not carry shame with it. But now, wretched girl, you have lost your fame at the same time as your happiness. Even the visions of the night have beguiled me—this is truer than any dream: you have suffered a worse fate than being, as I saw you, ripped up; this is a crueller wound than the cutting of the sword—and I could not see your ravisher, nor do I know how the whole wretched business came about: alas, alas, was he perhaps a slave?” This, showing that I had escaped, gave the maiden fresh courage. “Do not, mother,” said she, “thus disparage my virginity; nothing has happened to justify what you have said, and I know not who was here—god, demigod, or burglar. I was lying stricken with fright, and I was too much afraid, even to cry out: fear is a shackle on the tongue. Only one thing I know, that nobody has offended my virginity.” Then Panthea again fell down and wept:was: then we fled through the darkness and came to our own rooms. Panthea first of all fell down in a swoon: when she recovered, she straightway boxed Clio’s ears and caught her by the hair, at the same time crying out to her daughter: “Leucippe, you have destroyed all my hopes. Ah, my poor Sostratus, you are fighting at Byzantium to protect other people’s marriages, while at Tyre you have already been defeated and another has ravished your daughter’s marriage. Woe is me, Leucippe: I never thought to see your wedding in this wise: would that you had remained at Byzantium; would that you had suffered violence after the custom of war; yes, would even that a conquering Thracian had been your ravisher: a misfortune brought about by force does not carry shame with it. But now, wretched girl, you have lost your fame at the same time as your happiness. Even the visions of the night have beguiled me—this is truer than any dream: you have suffered a worse fate than being, as I saw you, ripped up; this is a crueller wound than the cutting of the sword—and I could not see your ravisher, nor do I know how the whole wretched business came about: alas, alas, was he perhaps a slave?” This, showing that I had escaped, gave the maiden fresh courage. “Do not, mother,” said she, “thus disparage my virginity; nothing has happened to justify what you have said, and I know not who was here—god, demigod, or burglar. I was lying stricken with fright, and I was too much afraid, even to cry out: fear is a shackle on the tongue. Only one thing I know, that nobody has offended my virginity.” Then Panthea again fell down and wept: but Satyrus and I, when we were alone in our rooms, were considering what we had best do, and we decided that the best course would be to fly before morning came and Clio revealed the whole story under torture.
 This resolved, we set about it at once. We told the porter that we were going out to see my mistress, and went to Clinias’ house. It was still deep night, and his porter made some difficulty about opening to us; but Clinias, whose bedroom was upstairs, heard us talking to him and came running down in disorder: and just at that moment we saw Clio behind us, running; she too had made up her mind to run away. So all together Clinias heard our story from us, and we Clio’s, how she had fled, and Clio our next intentions. We all therefore went indoors, related to Clinias all that had happened, and told him that we had made up our mind to fly. Then said Clio: “I am with you too: if I wait until morning, my only resource is death, which I prefer to torture.” Then Clinias took me by the hand and led me away from Clio. “I think,” said he, “that I have conceived the best idea: namely, to send her away privily, and ourselves remain a few days; then, if we like, we can ourselves go after making all necessary preparations. At present, so you tell me, the girl’s mother does not even know whom she caught; and when Clio has once disappeared there will be nobody able to inform her. And perhaps you will be able to persuade the girl to escape withbut Satyrus and I, when we were alone in our rooms, were considering what we had best do, and we decided that the best course would be to fly before morning came and Clio revealed the whole story under torture. This resolved, we set about it at once. We told the porter that we were going out to see my mistress, and went to Clinias’ house. It was still deep night, and his porter made some difficulty about opening to us; but Clinias, whose bedroom was upstairs, heard us talking to him and came running down in disorder: and just at that moment we saw Clio behind us, running; she too had made up her mind to run away. So all together Clinias heard our story from us, and we Clio’s, how she had fled, and Clio our next intentions. We all therefore went indoors, related to Clinias all that had happened, and told him that we had made up our mind to fly. Then said Clio: “I am with you too: if I wait until morning, my only resource is death, which I prefer to torture.” Then Clinias took me by the hand and led me away from Clio. “I think,” said he, “that I have conceived the best idea: namely, to send her away privily, and ourselves remain a few days; then, if we like, we can ourselves go after making all necessary preparations. At present, so you tell me, the girl’s mother does not even know whom she caught; and when Clio has once disappeared there will be nobody able to inform her. And perhaps you will be able to persuade the girl to escape with you.
 ” At the same time he told us that he was prepared to share our flight abroad. This plan commended itself to us: so he handed Clio over to the charge of one of his servants, telling him to put her aboard a ship, while we waited there and discussed the future. Our final decision was to make an attempt to persuade Leucippe, and if she were willing to accompany us in our flight, to act accordingly: if not, to remain at home and put ourselves in the hands of fortune. We reposed ourselves therefore for the small part of the night that was still left, and returned home again about dawn. When Panthea had risen, she began to set about the preparations for the torturing of Clio, and bade her be summoned. As Clio could not be found, she again hurried to her daughter. “Do you refuse,” said she, “to tell how this plot was composed? Now Clio too has fled.” On this Leucippe gained still greater courage, saying, “What more can I tell you? What more valid proof can I bring that I am speaking the truth? If there be any test of virginity, apply it to me.” “Yes,” said Panthea, “that was the one thing lacking—that our disgrace should be publicly known to others too.” As she said this, she flounced out of the room. Leucippe, left alone to ponder on her mother’s words, was a prey to various differing emotions; grief, shame, and anger. She was grieved at having been found out: she was ashamed because of the reproaches which had been cast upon her: and she was angry because her mother would not believe her. Shame, grief, and anger may be compared to three billows which dash against the soul: shame entersyou.” At the same time he told us that he was prepared to share our flight abroad. This plan commended itself to us: so he handed Clio over to the charge of one of his servants, telling him to put her aboard a ship, while we waited there and discussed the future. Our final decision was to make an attempt to persuade Leucippe, and if she were willing to accompany us in our flight, to act accordingly: if not, to remain at home and put ourselves in the hands of fortune. We reposed ourselves therefore for the small part of the night that was still left, and returned home again about dawn. When Panthea had risen, she began to set about the preparations for the torturing of Clio, and bade her be summoned. As Clio could not be found, she again hurried to her daughter. “Do you refuse,” said she, “to tell how this plot was composed? Now Clio too has fled.” On this Leucippe gained still greater courage, saying, “What more can I tell you? What more valid proof can I bring that I am speaking the truth? If there be any test of virginity, apply it to me.” “Yes,” said Panthea, “that was the one thing lacking—that our disgrace should be publicly known to others too.” As she said this, she flounced out of the room. Leucippe, left alone to ponder on her mother’s words, was a prey to various differing emotions; grief, shame, and anger. She was grieved at having been found out: she was ashamed because of the reproaches which had been cast upon her: and she was angry because her mother would not believe her. Shame, grief, and anger may be compared to three billows which dash against the soul: shame enters through the eyes and takes away their freedom; grief diffuses itself about the breast and tends to extinguish the lively flame of the soul; while anger, roaring round the heart, overwhelms the reasoning power with its foam of madness.
 Of all these speech is the begetter: it is like a bow shooting and aiming at its mark and discharging its wounding arrows of various kinds against the soul. One of its arrows is upbraiding, the wound it causes, anger. Another is the conviction of wrong, and the wound caused by it grief. The third is the reproach for error, and the wound inflicted by this is called shame. All these arrows have the same peculiarity; the wounds they deal are deep, but bloodless, and there is but one remedy for all of them—to return the same arrows against the enemy. Speech is the arrow of the tongue, and the wound it causes can only be cured by another tongue shooting in return: this quiets the anger of the heart and deadens the soul’s pain. If the fact that one is dealing with a stronger makes such a return impossible, the wound grows more painful by reason of the silence thus enjoined. For the pains which are the result of these stormy waves of speech, if they cannot cast off their foam, swell within and only become the more severe. Such were the thoughts that surged upon Leucippe’s mind, and she was little able to bear their onslaught.through the eyes and takes away their freedom; grief diffuses itself about the breast and tends to extinguish the lively flame of the soul; while anger, roaring round the heart, overwhelms the reasoning power with its foam of madness. Of all these speech is the begetter: it is like a bow shooting and aiming at its mark and discharging its wounding arrows of various kinds against the soul. One of its arrows is upbraiding, the wound it causes, anger. Another is the conviction of wrong, and the wound caused by it grief. The third is the reproach for error, and the wound inflicted by this is called shame. All these arrows have the same peculiarity; the wounds they deal are deep, but bloodless, and there is but one remedy for all of them—to return the same arrows against the enemy. Speech is the arrow of the tongue, and the wound it causes can only be cured by another tongue shooting in return: this quiets the anger of the heart and deadens the soul’s pain. If the fact that one is dealing with a stronger makes such a return impossible, the wound grows more painful by reason of the silence thus enjoined. For the pains which are the result of these stormy waves of speech, if they cannot cast off their foam, swell within and only become the more severe. Such were the thoughts that surged upon Leucippe’s mind, and she was little able to bear their onslaught.
 It so happened that just at that moment I sent Satyrus to her to see if she were prepared to run away with us. But before she even heard what he had to say, “I implore you,” said she to Satyrus, “in the name of our country gods and all there are in the world, take me away, wherever you like, out of my mother’s sight. If you go away and leave me behind, I shall end my life by a noose of my own making.” When I heard of her words, I felt that the greater part of my anxiety was gone; we waited a couple of days, while my father was still away, and began to make our preparations for flight. Satyrus still had some of that drug left with which he had put Conops to sleep; and while he was waiting upon us, he poured some of it unobserved into the last cup which he was bringing to Panthea: after rising from the table she went to her chamber and there fell at once asleep. Leucippe had a second chambermaid; with her, too, ever since she had been placed in that position, Satyrus had pretended to be in love, and he gave her also a dose of the same mixture; then he proceeded to his third victim, the porter, and successfully drugged him with a similar draught. A carriage was waiting in readiness for us outside the gates, due to the forethought of Clinias, and he himself got into it and waited there for us. When everybody was asleep, at about the first watch of the night, we went out without a sound, Satyrus leading Leucippe by the hand; fortunately Conops, who was in constant ambush for us, was away on that particular day on some business for his mistress. Satyrus opened the doors; we followed; and when we had arrived at the gates, we entered the carriage: we were six in all—ourselves, Clinias, and two servants of his.
 We took the road to Sidon; arriving there when another watch of the night was about spent, we hurried on to Berytus, expecting that we should find some ship at anchor there. Nor were we disappointed: for as we arrived at the harbour of Berytus, we found a ship just sailing, on the very point of casting loose; so we asked no questions as to her destination, but embarked all our belongings aboard; it was then a little before dawn. It appeared that she was making the voyage to Alexandria, the great city at the mouth of the Nile. I was at once full of joy, even at my first sight of the ocean, before the boat got out to sea but was still riding in the harbour. When the breeze seemed favourable for putting off, a busy commotion arose throughout the ship—the crew running hither and thither, the helmsman giving his orders, men hauling on the ropes. The yard-arm was pulled round, the sail set, the ship leaped forward, the anchors were pulled in-deck, the harbour was left; we saw the coast little by little receding from the ship, as though it were itself in movement; there were songs of joy and much prayer directed to the gods saviours, invoking good omens for a prosperous voyage; meanwhile the wind freshened, the sail bellied, and the ship sped along.doors; we followed; and when we had arrived at the gates, we entered the carriage: we were six in all—ourselves, Clinias, and two servants of his. We took the road to Sidon; arriving there when another watch of the night was about spent, we hurried on to Berytus, expecting that we should find some ship at anchor there. Nor were we disappointed: for as we arrived at the harbour of Berytus, we found a ship just sailing, on the very point of casting loose; so we asked no questions as to her destination, but embarked all our belongings aboard; it was then a little before dawn. It appeared that she was making the voyage to Alexandria, the great city at the mouth of the Nile. I was at once full of joy, even at my first sight of the ocean, before the boat got out to sea but was still riding in the harbour. When the breeze seemed favourable for putting off, a busy commotion arose throughout the ship—the crew running hither and thither, the helmsman giving his orders, men hauling on the ropes. The yard-arm was pulled round, the sail set, the ship leaped forward, the anchors were pulled in-deck, the harbour was left; we saw the coast little by little receding from the ship, as though it were itself in movement; there were songs of joy and much prayer directed to the gods saviours, invoking good omens for a prosperous voyage; meanwhile the wind freshened, the sail bellied, and the ship sped along.
 There happened to be camping near us on board a young man, who, when breakfast-time arrived, very courteously asked us to take the meal with him. Satyrus was just bringing our victuals; so that we put all that we had into the common stock, and made a joint meal and also shared the conversation. I was the first to speak: “Where do you come from, young sir, and what are you called?” “Menelaus is my name,” he replied, “an Egyptian by nationality. What are yours? “I am Clitophon, this is Clinias, Phoenicians both.” “What then is the reason that you are thus leaving your country?” “Tell us your story first, and then we will relate ours to you.” Menelaus then began: “The summary of my absence from my native land is an ill-starred love and a hunt with evil event. I loved a fair youth, who was a passionate huntsman. I tried to check him, but my attempts were unsuccessful; as he would not obey me, I used to go with him on his expeditions. One day we were both out hunting on horseback; at first we were successful, chasing small beasts only. Suddenly a boar sprang from the wood; the youth gave chase. Then the boar turned and faced him, charging directly at him. But he would not give ground, though I shouted and yelled, ‘Pull in your horse and turn the reins; the beast is dangerous.’ The boar made a spring and charged right at him. They closed with one another, but as I saw it I was overcome with fright, and, fearing that the brute would get his blow in first and wound the horse, I poised my javelin without taking sufficiently careful aim, and let fly.
 The youth crossed the line and received it full. What do you think that my feelings were then? If I had any feelings at all, they were like those of a living death. More pitiful still, while he yet faintly breathed he stretched out his hands to me and embraced me; in his death-throes he that was slaughtered by me did not loathe my accursed self, but he gave up the ghost embracing my murderous hand. His parents dragged me, not at all unwilling, before the tribunal of justice. I made no defence there, and proposed the penalty of death. So the jury took pity upon me, and sentenced me to three years’ banishment; this period has now come to an end, and I am returning to my own country.” As he spoke, Clinias wept as the Trojan women wept over Patroclus; he remembered Charicles. “You weep at my woes” said Menelaus; “Has some similar adventure exiled you too?” Then Clinias groaned bitterly and related to him the story of Charicles and the horse, and I told my tale too. Seeing that Menelaus was greatly dejected at the memory of his sorrows, and that Clinias too was secretly weeping when he recalled Charicles, I was anxious to banish their grief, and embarked upon a discussion which would divert the mind by a love-interest. Leucippe was not present, but wasovercome with fright, and, fearing that the brute would get his blow in first and wound the horse, I poised my javelin without taking sufficiently careful aim, and let fly. The youth crossed the line and received it full. What do you think that my feelings were then? If I had any feelings at all, they were like those of a living death. More pitiful still, while he yet faintly breathed he stretched out his hands to me and embraced me; in his death-throes he that was slaughtered by me did not loathe my accursed self, but he gave up the ghost embracing my murderous hand. His parents dragged me, not at all unwilling, before the tribunal of justice. I made no defence there, and proposed the penalty of death. So the jury took pity upon me, and sentenced me to three years’ banishment; this period has now come to an end, and I am returning to my own country.” As he spoke, Clinias wept as the Trojan women wept over Patroclus; he remembered Charicles. “You weep at my woes” said Menelaus; “Has some similar adventure exiled you too?” Then Clinias groaned bitterly and related to him the story of Charicles and the horse, and I told my tale too. Seeing that Menelaus was greatly dejected at the memory of his sorrows, and that Clinias too was secretly weeping when he recalled Charicles, I was anxious to banish their grief, and embarked upon a discussion which would divert the mind by a love-interest. Leucippe was not present, but was asleep in the ship’s hold.
 I remarked to them with a smile, “How much more fortunate than I is Clinias: he was doubtless about to declaim against women, as is his wont, and now he can speak with the greater freedom, because he has found another that shares his ideas in love. I know not how it is that this affection for youths is now so fashionable.” “Why,” said Menelaus, “is not the one sort much preferable to the other? Youths have a much simpler nature than women, and their beauty is a keener stimulant to delight.” “How keener,” said I, “considering that it has no sooner blossomed than it is gone, giving the adorer no opportunity of enjoying it? It is like the draught of Tantalus; often in the very act of drinking it disappears, and the lover must retire thirsty, and that which is actually being drunk is whisked away before the drinker has had his fill. Never can the lover leave the object of his affection with unalloyed delight; it always leaves him thirsty still.” “You know not, Clitophon,” said Menelaus, “the sum of all pleasure: the unsatisfied is the most desirable of all. The longer a thing lasts, the more likely is it to cloy by satiety; that which is constantly being ravished away from us is ever new and always at its prime—delight cannot grow old and the shorter its time the greater is its intensityasleep in the ship’s hold. I remarked to them with a smile, “How much more fortunate than I is Clinias: he was doubtless about to declaim against women, as is his wont, and now he can speak with the greater freedom, because he has found another that shares his ideas in love. I know not how it is that this affection for youths is now so fashionable.” “Why,” said Menelaus, “is not the one sort much preferable to the other? Youths have a much simpler nature than women, and their beauty is a keener stimulant to delight.” “How keener,” said I, “considering that it has no sooner blossomed than it is gone, giving the adorer no opportunity of enjoying it? It is like the draught of Tantalus; often in the very act of drinking it disappears, and the lover must retire thirsty, and that which is actually being drunk is whisked away before the drinker has had his fill. Never can the lover leave the object of his affection with unalloyed delight; it always leaves him thirsty still.” “You know not, Clitophon,” said Menelaus, “the sum of all pleasure: the unsatisfied is the most desirable of all. The longer a thing lasts, the more likely is it to cloy by satiety; that which is constantly being ravished away from us is ever new and always at its prime—delight cannot grow old and the shorter its time the greater is its intensity increased in desire.
 This is why the rose is of all flowers the most beautiful, because its beauty is so fleeting. I hold that there are two different kinds of beauty conversant among men, the one heavenly, the other vulgar \[presided over by their respective goddesses\]; the heavenly sort chafes at being fettered by its mortal habitation and is ever seeking to hurry back again to its heavenly home, while the vulgar kind is diffused on our earth below and stays long in association with human bodies. If one may quote a poet as a witness of the flight of beauty to heaven, listen to Homer, who tells how The gods to be Jove’s cup-bearer in heaven him did take, To dwell immortal there with them, all for his beauty’s sake. But no woman ever went up to heaven by reason of her beauty—yes, Zeus had dealings with women too—but the fate of Alcmene was sorrow and exile, of Danae an ark and the sea, while Semele became food for fire. But if his affections fall upon this Phrygian youth, he takes him to heaven to be with him and to pour his nectar for him; and she whoseincreased in desire. This is why the rose is of all flowers the most beautiful, because its beauty is so fleeting. I hold that there are two different kinds of beauty conversant among men, the one heavenly, the other vulgar \[presided over by their respective goddesses\]; the heavenly sort chafes at being fettered by its mortal habitation and is ever seeking to hurry back again to its heavenly home, while the vulgar kind is diffused on our earth below and stays long in association with human bodies. If one may quote a poet as a witness of the flight of beauty to heaven, listen to Homer, who tells how The gods to be Jove’s cup-bearer in heaven him did take, To dwell immortal there with them, all for his beauty’s sake. But no woman ever went up to heaven by reason of her beauty—yes, Zeus had dealings with women too—but the fate of Alcmene was sorrow and exile, of Danae an ark and the sea, while Semele became food for fire. But if his affections fall upon this Phrygian youth, he takes him to heaven to be with him and to pour his nectar for him; and she whose was formerly this duty, was deprived of the honour—she, I fancy, was a woman.
 ” Here I interrupted him. “Woman’s beauty,” said I, “seems the more heavenly of the two, because it does not rapidly fade; the incorruptible is not far from the divine, while that which is ever changing and corruptible (in which it resembles our poor mortality) is not heavenly but vulgar. Zeus was fired with a Phrygian stripling; true, and he took his Phrygian up to heaven; but women’s beauty actually brought Zeus down from heaven. For a woman Zeus once lowed as a bull; for a woman he danced the satyr’s dance; for another woman he changed himself into gold. Let Ganymede pour out the wine; but let Hera drink with the gods, so that a woman may have a youth to serve her. I am even sorry for him in the manner of his assumption—a savage bird swooped down upon him, and when he had been seized by it he was placed in an ignominious position, looking like one crucified. Can one imagine a viler sight than a youth hanging from a beast’swas formerly this duty, was deprived of the honour—she, I fancy, was a woman.” Here I interrupted him. “Woman’s beauty,” said I, “seems the more heavenly of the two, because it does not rapidly fade; the incorruptible is not far from the divine, while that which is ever changing and corruptible (in which it resembles our poor mortality) is not heavenly but vulgar. Zeus was fired with a Phrygian stripling; true, and he took his Phrygian up to heaven; but women’s beauty actually brought Zeus down from heaven. For a woman Zeus once lowed as a bull; for a woman he danced the satyr’s dance; for another woman he changed himself into gold. Let Ganymede pour out the wine; but let Hera drink with the gods, so that a woman may have a youth to serve her. I am even sorry for him in the manner of his assumption—a savage bird swooped down upon him, and when he had been seized by it he was placed in an ignominious position, looking like one crucified. Can one imagine a viler sight than a youth hanging from a beast’s talons? But Semele was caught up to heaven—not by a savage bird, but by fire.
 It is no matter for surprise that any should ascend to heaven through fire: that is how Hercules ascended. You laugh at Danae’s ark, but you say nothing of Perseus. As for Alcmene, this compliment alone is enough for her, that for her sake Zeus stole away three whole courses of the sun. But it is time to leave mythology and to talk of the delights of reality, though here I am but a novice; I have only had the society of women whose favourite haunt is Love; perhaps somebody else who has been more deeply initiated might have more to say; but I will make an attempt, though my experience has been so small. In a woman then, during lovers’ embraces her body is supple and her lips are soft for kisses. Therefore both in her embraces and in her tender flesh she holds the man’s body completely fitted in; and he who is within is surrounded with pleasure. Her kisses also she presses closely like seals lip to lip, and she makes love with artistic skill and purposely renders each kiss all the sweeter. For she not only likes to kiss with her lips but meets you with her teeth too and forages round the kisser’s mouth; and her kisses bite you. Her breasts too when you feel them have a sort of pleasure all their own. Again, in the orgasm of Love she is maddened with pleasure, opens her mouth wide as she kisses, and goes crazy. The lovers’ tongues too, while this goes on, haunt each other’s company, and they too struggle to kisstalons? But Semele was caught up to heaven—not by a savage bird, but by fire. It is no matter for surprise that any should ascend to heaven through fire: that is how Hercules ascended. You laugh at Danae’s ark, but you say nothing of Perseus. As for Alcmene, this compliment alone is enough for her, that for her sake Zeus stole away three whole courses of the sun. But it is time to leave mythology and to talk of the delights of reality, though here I am but a novice; I have only had the society of women whose favourite haunt is Love; perhaps somebody else who has been more deeply initiated might have more to say; but I will make an attempt, though my experience has been so small. In a woman then, during lovers’ embraces her body is supple and her lips are soft for kisses. Therefore both in her embraces and in her tender flesh she holds the man’s body completely fitted in; and he who is within is surrounded with pleasure. Her kisses also she presses closely like seals lip to lip, and she makes love with artistic skill and purposely renders each kiss all the sweeter. For she not only likes to kiss with her lips but meets you with her teeth too and forages round the kisser’s mouth; and her kisses bite you. Her breasts too when you feel them have a sort of pleasure all their own. Again, in the orgasm of Love she is maddened with pleasure, opens her mouth wide as she kisses, and goes crazy. The lovers’ tongues too, while this goes on, haunt each other’s company, and they too struggle to kiss so far as they can.
 also make the pleasure greater if you kiss with open mouth. At the end itself of Love the woman pants— natural to her—because of the burning heat of her pleasure. Her gasps, rushing up with her amorous spirit to her mouth and lips, meet the kiss that wanders around and desires to go down. The kiss too turns back in company with her gasping, and follows mingled with it and strikes the heart which, profoundly moved by the kiss, beats fast. Indeed, if the heart were not bound fast in the flesh, it would follow the kisses and draw itself upwards with them. On the other hand the kisses of boys are untutored, their embraces are unskilled, their Love is lazy, and in them is no pleasure at all.” Then Menelaus: “But, my dear sir,” said he, “you seem to me to be, in matters of love, no raw tiro but a veteran. What a lot of feminine superfluities you have swamped us with! Hear now in your turn a counter-argument of facts about boys too. In a woman, then, all that she says and all her actions too are figments for the occasion. Does she look beautiful? You have there nothing but the fussy trickery of oily paint and perfume; her “beauty” is that of unguents or hair-dye or †make ups†. If you strip any woman of all these numerous deceptions, she looks like a jackdaw stripped of its feathers as in the story. But the beauty of boys— does not reek of wet unguents or deceptive scents that are foreign to it; and the sweat of boys smells sweeterso far as they can. also make the pleasure greater if you kiss with open mouth. At the end itself of Love the woman pants— natural to her—because of the burning heat of her pleasure. Her gasps, rushing up with her amorous spirit to her mouth and lips, meet the kiss that wanders around and desires to go down. The kiss too turns back in company with her gasping, and follows mingled with it and strikes the heart which, profoundly moved by the kiss, beats fast. Indeed, if the heart were not bound fast in the flesh, it would follow the kisses and draw itself upwards with them. On the other hand the kisses of boys are untutored, their embraces are unskilled, their Love is lazy, and in them is no pleasure at all.” Then Menelaus: “But, my dear sir,” said he, “you seem to me to be, in matters of love, no raw tiro but a veteran. What a lot of feminine superfluities you have swamped us with! Hear now in your turn a counter-argument of facts about boys too. In a woman, then, all that she says and all her actions too are figments for the occasion. Does she look beautiful? You have there nothing but the fussy trickery of oily paint and perfume; her “beauty” is that of unguents or hair-dye or †make ups†. If you strip any woman of all these numerous deceptions, she looks like a jackdaw stripped of its feathers as in the story. But the beauty of boys— does not reek of wet unguents or deceptive scents that are foreign to it; and the sweat of boys smells sweeter than all the greasy ointments used by women.
 Moreover you can meet your boy, before any embracements of love, in the wrestling school, and spread yourself round him in embraces which involve no shyness, and he doesn’t make an over-soft affair of Love’s entanglements through suppleness of the flesh; but instead the two bodies resist each other and have a contest where pleasure is the prize. As for boys’ kisses— lack the cleverness of women’s and your boy does not perform with his lips a mischievous tomfool conjuring trick, but simply kisses as he knows how, and his kisses are not art’s but nature’s. The image of a boy’s kiss is this:—suppose that nectar had congealed and formed a lip; the kind of kisses you would have had. You would never have too much of love; but, no matter how much you take in the kisses, you still thirst for love; and you would not want to withdraw your mouth until you were to shrink from further kisses through the mere pleasure of them.than all the greasy ointments used by women. Moreover you can meet your boy, before any embracements of love, in the wrestling school, and spread yourself round him in embraces which involve no shyness, and he doesn’t make an over-soft affair of Love’s entanglements through suppleness of the flesh; but instead the two bodies resist each other and have a contest where pleasure is the prize. As for boys’ kisses— lack the cleverness of women’s and your boy does not perform with his lips a mischievous tomfool conjuring trick, but simply kisses as he knows how, and his kisses are not art’s but nature’s. The image of a boy’s kiss is this:—suppose that nectar had congealed and formed a lip; the kind of kisses you would have had. You would never have too much of love; but, no matter how much you take in the kisses, you still thirst for love; and you would not want to withdraw your mouth until you were to shrink from further kisses through the mere pleasure of them.
 On the third day of our voyage, the perfect calm we had hitherto experienced was suddenly overcast by dark clouds and the daylight disappeared, a wind blew upwards from the sea full in the ship’s face, and the helmsman bade the sail yard be slewed round. The sailors hastened to effect this, bunching up half the sail upon the yard by main force, for the increasing violence of the gusts obstructed their efforts; for the rest, they kept enough of the full spread to make the wind help them to tack. As a result of this, the ship lay on her side, one bulwark raised upward into the air and the deck a steep slope, so that most of us thought that she must heel over when the gale next struck us. We transferred ourselves therefore to that part of the boat which was highest out of water, in order to lighten that part which was down in the sea, and so if possible, by our own added weight depressing the former, to bring the whole again to a level; but all was of no avail: the high part of the deck, far from being weighed down by our presence, merely lifted us higher still away from the water. For some time we thus ineffectually struggled to bring to an equilibrium the vessel thus balanced on the waves: but the wind suddenly shifted to the other side so that the ship was almost sent under water, and instantly that part of the boat which had been down in the waves was now violently thrown up, and the part formerly raised on high was crushed down into the waters.
 Then arose a great wailing from the ship, and all changed their station, running, with shouts and cries, to the position in which they had been before they moved; and the same thing happening a third and a fourth, nay, many times, we thus imitated the motion of the ship; and even before we had finished one transmigration, the necessity for a second and contrary one was upon us. The whole day long then we carried our baggage up and down the ship, running, as it were, a long-distance race a thousand times, with the expectation of death ever before our eyes. Nor did it seem far off, for about mid day or a little after the sun totally disappeared, and we could see one another no better than by moonlight. Lightning flashed from the sky, the heaven bellowed with thunder so that the whole air rang with the din; this was answered from below by the turmoil of the waves, and between sky and sea whistled the noise of contending winds. In this manner the air seemed to be turned into one vast trumpet; the ropes beat against the sail, creaking as they crossed one another, and there was every reason to fear for the broken planks of the ship that the rivets would no longer keep together and that the whole would fall asunder. The wicker bulwarks were actually under water the whole ship round. For much rain fell too, washing over the decks, so we crept under the wattlings as if into a cave, and thereshifted to the other side so that the ship was almost sent under water, and instantly that part of the boat which had been down in the waves was now violently thrown up, and the part formerly raised on high was crushed down into the waters. Then arose a great wailing from the ship, and all changed their station, running, with shouts and cries, to the position in which they had been before they moved; and the same thing happening a third and a fourth, nay, many times, we thus imitated the motion of the ship; and even before we had finished one transmigration, the necessity for a second and contrary one was upon us. The whole day long then we carried our baggage up and down the ship, running, as it were, a long-distance race a thousand times, with the expectation of death ever before our eyes. Nor did it seem far off, for about mid day or a little after the sun totally disappeared, and we could see one another no better than by moonlight. Lightning flashed from the sky, the heaven bellowed with thunder so that the whole air rang with the din; this was answered from below by the turmoil of the waves, and between sky and sea whistled the noise of contending winds. In this manner the air seemed to be turned into one vast trumpet; the ropes beat against the sail, creaking as they crossed one another, and there was every reason to fear for the broken planks of the ship that the rivets would no longer keep together and that the whole would fall asunder. The wicker bulwarks were actually under water the whole ship round. For much rain fell too, washing over the decks, so we crept under the wattlings as if into a cave, and there we waited, trusting to luck but giving up all hope.
 Great waves came from every quarter; some from the bows, some dashed against one another at the ship’s stern. The vessel rose first as the wave heaved beneath it, and then sank deep as it retired and sank low down; the billows were now like mountains, now like valleys. More terrifying still were those which struck us athwart from either side. For the water rose up, rolled over the bulwarks, and deluged the whole vessel; even from a distance the wave could be seen lifting its head on high so as almost to touch the clouds, and threatening the ship, as large as \[a mountain\]; and when one saw it as it approached nearer, one would think that it would swallow it up altogether. It was a fight between wind and water: we could never keep still in one spot owing to the shocks imparted to the vessel. A confused noise of all kinds arose—roaring of waves, whistling of wind, shrieking of women, shouting of men, the calling of the sailors’ orders; all was full of wailing and lamentation. Then the helmsman ordered the jettison of the cargo. No difference was made between gold and silver and the cheapest stuff, but we hurled all alike from the ship’s sides; many of the merchants themselves seized their goods, on which all their hopes were centred, and hastened to pitch them overboard. Now the ship was stripped of all its contents; but the storm was still unabated.we waited, trusting to luck but giving up all hope. Great waves came from every quarter; some from the bows, some dashed against one another at the ship’s stern. The vessel rose first as the wave heaved beneath it, and then sank deep as it retired and sank low down; the billows were now like mountains, now like valleys. More terrifying still were those which struck us athwart from either side. For the water rose up, rolled over the bulwarks, and deluged the whole vessel; even from a distance the wave could be seen lifting its head on high so as almost to touch the clouds, and threatening the ship, as large as \[a mountain\]; and when one saw it as it approached nearer, one would think that it would swallow it up altogether. It was a fight between wind and water: we could never keep still in one spot owing to the shocks imparted to the vessel. A confused noise of all kinds arose—roaring of waves, whistling of wind, shrieking of women, shouting of men, the calling of the sailors’ orders; all was full of wailing and lamentation. Then the helmsman ordered the jettison of the cargo. No difference was made between gold and silver and the cheapest stuff, but we hurled all alike from the ship’s sides; many of the merchants themselves seized their goods, on which all their hopes were centred, and hastened to pitch them overboard. Now the ship was stripped of all its contents; but the storm was still unabated.
 At length the helmsman threw up his task. He dropped the steering oars from his hands and left the ship to the mercy of the sea; he then had the jolly-boat got ready, and bidding the sailors follow him, was the first to descend the ladder and enter her. They jumped in close after him, and then was confusion worse confounded and a hand-to-hand fight ensued. They who were already in the boat began to cut the rope which held her to to the ship, while all the passengers made preparations to jump where they saw the helmsman holding on to the rope; the boat’s crew objected to this, and, being armed with axes and swords, threatened to attack any who leaped in; many, on the other hand, of those still on the ship armed themselves as best they might, one picking up a piece of an old oar, another taking a fragment of one of the ship’s benches, and so began to defend themselves. At sea might is right, and there now followed a novel kind of sea-fight; those already in the jolly-boat, fearing she would be swamped by the number of those desiring to enter her, struck at them as they jumped with their axes and swords, while the passengers returned the blows as they jumped with planks and oars. Some of them merely touched the edge of the boat and slipped into the sea; some effected their entry and were now struggling with the crew already there. Every law of friendship and pity disappeared, and each man, regarding only his own safety, utterly disregarded all feelings of kindliness towards his neighbours. Great dangers do away with all bonds, even the most dear.
 At that point one of the passengers, a sturdy young man, seized the cable and drew up the jolly-boat until it was quite close to the ship’s side, and everybody made ready to jump into it directly it should be close enough. Two or three were successful, though they effected their object not unscathed, and many made the attempt to leap only to fall from the ship into the sea; for the crew cut the rope with an axe, cast the boat off, and set sail wherever the wind was driving them, while the passengers did their best to sink it. Our vessel, after much plunging and tossing upon the waves, drove unexpectedly on to a rock hidden under water, and was utterly broken in pieces; as she slipped off the rock the mast fell on one side, breaking up part of her and carrying the rest beneath the water. Those who instantly perished, their lungs full of salt water, experienced the most tolerable fate in our general evil plight, because they were not kept in suspense by the fear of death. For a slow death at sea lets a man suffer all its pangs before the actual moment of dissolution. The eye, satiated with the waste expanse of the waters, prolongs the agony of fear, so that perishing in these circumstances is far more wretched than in any other: the terror of such a death is great in proportion to the size of the ocean. Some tried to swim, and were killed by being dashed by the waves on to the rock: many others fell upon broken pieces of wood and were spitted upon them like fishes; others were swimming about already half dead. The ship thus broken up, some favouring deity kept whole for us that part of the prow on which Leucippe and I were seated astride, and we floated as the sea carried us, Menelaus and Satyrus, together with some others of the passengers, happened upon the mast, and swam, using it as a support.
 Close by we saw Clinias swimming with his hands on the yard-arm, and we heard him cry; “Keep hold of your piece of wood, Clitophon.” As he spoke, a wave overwhelmed him from behind. We cried out at the sight, and at the same time the wave bore down upon us too; but by good fortune when it came near it only heaved us up and passed by beneath us, and we once again saw the spar lifted up on high on the crest of the billow, with Clinias upon it. “Have pity,” I wailed and cried, “Lord Poseidon, and make a truce with us, the remnants of your shipwreck. We have already undergone many deaths through fear; if you mean to kill us, do not make our deaths separate; let one wave overwhelm us. If our fate is to become food for sea-beasts, let one fish destroy us and one maw swallow us, that even in the fish we may have a common tomb.” It was but a short time after I had uttered this prayer that the wind dropped and the savagery of the waves subsided; the sea was full of the corpses of the dead; and the tide rapidly brought Menelaus and his servants to land. (This land was the coast of Egypt, then wholly infested by robbers.) We, towards evening, chanced to come ashore at Pelusium; in joy at our safe arrival we first gave thanks to thethe sea carried us, Menelaus and Satyrus, together with some others of the passengers, happened upon the mast, and swam, using it as a support. Close by we saw Clinias swimming with his hands on the yard-arm, and we heard him cry; “Keep hold of your piece of wood, Clitophon.” As he spoke, a wave overwhelmed him from behind. We cried out at the sight, and at the same time the wave bore down upon us too; but by good fortune when it came near it only heaved us up and passed by beneath us, and we once again saw the spar lifted up on high on the crest of the billow, with Clinias upon it. “Have pity,” I wailed and cried, “Lord Poseidon, and make a truce with us, the remnants of your shipwreck. We have already undergone many deaths through fear; if you mean to kill us, do not make our deaths separate; let one wave overwhelm us. If our fate is to become food for sea-beasts, let one fish destroy us and one maw swallow us, that even in the fish we may have a common tomb.” It was but a short time after I had uttered this prayer that the wind dropped and the savagery of the waves subsided; the sea was full of the corpses of the dead; and the tide rapidly brought Menelaus and his servants to land. (This land was the coast of Egypt, then wholly infested by robbers.) We, towards evening, chanced to come ashore at Pelusium; in joy at our safe arrival we first gave thanks to the gods and then bewailed Clinias and Satyrus, thinking that they had both perished.
 At Pelusium is the holy statue of Zeus of Mount Casius; in it the god is represented so young that he seems more like Apollo. He has one hand stretched out and holds a pomegranate in it, and this pomegranate has a mystical signification. After adoring the deity and asking for an oracle about Clinias and Satyrus (we were told that the god was willing to give prophetic answers) we went round the temple, and near the postern door we saw a double picture, signed by the artist; it had been painted by Evanthes, and represented first Andromeda, then Prometheus, both of them in chains—and this was the reason, I suppose, why the artist had associated the two subjects. In other respects too the two works were akin. In both, the chains were attached to a rock, and in both, beasts were the torturers—his from the air, and hers from the sea; their deliverers were Argives of the same family, his Hercules and hers Perseus; the one shooting Zeus’s eagle and the other contending with the sea-beast of Posidon. The former was represented aiming with his arrow on land, the latter suspended in the air on his wings. In the picture of Andromeda, there was a hollow in the rock of about the size of the maiden, but it was of a sort that would indicate that it wasgods and then bewailed Clinias and Satyrus, thinking that they had both perished. At Pelusium is the holy statue of Zeus of Mount Casius; in it the god is represented so young that he seems more like Apollo. He has one hand stretched out and holds a pomegranate in it, and this pomegranate has a mystical signification. After adoring the deity and asking for an oracle about Clinias and Satyrus (we were told that the god was willing to give prophetic answers) we went round the temple, and near the postern door we saw a double picture, signed by the artist; it had been painted by Evanthes, and represented first Andromeda, then Prometheus, both of them in chains—and this was the reason, I suppose, why the artist had associated the two subjects. In other respects too the two works were akin. In both, the chains were attached to a rock, and in both, beasts were the torturers—his from the air, and hers from the sea; their deliverers were Argives of the same family, his Hercules and hers Perseus; the one shooting Zeus’s eagle and the other contending with the sea-beast of Posidon. The former was represented aiming with his arrow on land, the latter suspended in the air on his wings. In the picture of Andromeda, there was a hollow in the rock of about the size of the maiden, but it was of a sort that would indicate that it was not artificially made, but natural, for the painter had made its surface rough, just as nature had fashioned it.
 She rested within its embrace, and while, if one gazed upon her beauty, one would compare her to a newly carven statue, anybody seeing the chains and the approaching beast would think the rock a hastily contrived tomb. Upon her face was a mixture of beauty and fear; fear sat upon her cheeks, and beauty shone from her eyes. Even so, the pallor of her cheeks was not utterly without colour, but there was a gentle flush upon them; nor was the flower of beauty in her eyes without care, but was rather to be compared to violets that have just begun to fade. The painter had depicted her with the terror that did but enhance her charms. Her hands were stretched out against the wall of rock, a bond holding both of them fast to it above her head, so that her fingers hung like bunches of fruit from a vine; the arms of spotless white verging towards the livid, and the fingers white with the pallor of death. Thus was she bound, waiting for her fate, adorned for a bridal as one who was to be the bride of the King of Death. She wore a tunic reaching to her feet, and white, of the thinnest woof like a spider’s web; not like that woven of the hair of sheep but of the produce of that winged insect which Indian women spin into thread from trees and weave into silk. The beast is just coming up and opening the surface of the water, facing the maiden; most of its body was still enveloped in the waves, its head alone being above the surface, but beneath the foamnot artificially made, but natural, for the painter had made its surface rough, just as nature had fashioned it. She rested within its embrace, and while, if one gazed upon her beauty, one would compare her to a newly carven statue, anybody seeing the chains and the approaching beast would think the rock a hastily contrived tomb. Upon her face was a mixture of beauty and fear; fear sat upon her cheeks, and beauty shone from her eyes. Even so, the pallor of her cheeks was not utterly without colour, but there was a gentle flush upon them; nor was the flower of beauty in her eyes without care, but was rather to be compared to violets that have just begun to fade. The painter had depicted her with the terror that did but enhance her charms. Her hands were stretched out against the wall of rock, a bond holding both of them fast to it above her head, so that her fingers hung like bunches of fruit from a vine; the arms of spotless white verging towards the livid, and the fingers white with the pallor of death. Thus was she bound, waiting for her fate, adorned for a bridal as one who was to be the bride of the King of Death. She wore a tunic reaching to her feet, and white, of the thinnest woof like a spider’s web; not like that woven of the hair of sheep but of the produce of that winged insect which Indian women spin into thread from trees and weave into silk. The beast is just coming up and opening the surface of the water, facing the maiden; most of its body was still enveloped in the waves, its head alone being above the surface, but beneath the foam the outline of its back was represented as apparent, as well as its knotted scales, its arched neck, its pointed prickles, and its twisting tail.
 Its mouth was wide and deep, and gaped open to where its neck joined its shoulders, and straightway there is the belly. Painted between the beast and the maiden was Perseus descending from the air; he was advancing to attack the monster, quite naked except for his mantle thrown about his shoulders, his winged sandals upon his feet, and a cap on his head, which signified Pluto’s helmet. In his left hand he bore the Gorgon’s head and held it before him like a shield; it was frightful, even in the artist’s representation, with its staring, protruding eyes, its bristling hair about the temples, its waving snakes; even as painted it seemed to threaten evil. That was the armament of Perseus’s left hand, in his right he held an iron weapon of double shape, something between a sickle and a sword; it began below as one, but half way up it split; half was pointed, and that half remained a sword, as it began; the other half was curved, thus becoming like a sickle, so that in a single blow one might with one portion kill by piercing and with the other by cutting. So much for the episode of Andromeda. Next to it was that of Prometheus. Rock and iron form his bonds, and Hercules is armed with bow and spear. The bird was feasting upon histhe outline of its back was represented as apparent, as well as its knotted scales, its arched neck, its pointed prickles, and its twisting tail. Its mouth was wide and deep, and gaped open to where its neck joined its shoulders, and straightway there is the belly. Painted between the beast and the maiden was Perseus descending from the air; he was advancing to attack the monster, quite naked except for his mantle thrown about his shoulders, his winged sandals upon his feet, and a cap on his head, which signified Pluto’s helmet. In his left hand he bore the Gorgon’s head and held it before him like a shield; it was frightful, even in the artist’s representation, with its staring, protruding eyes, its bristling hair about the temples, its waving snakes; even as painted it seemed to threaten evil. That was the armament of Perseus’s left hand, in his right he held an iron weapon of double shape, something between a sickle and a sword; it began below as one, but half way up it split; half was pointed, and that half remained a sword, as it began; the other half was curved, thus becoming like a sickle, so that in a single blow one might with one portion kill by piercing and with the other by cutting. So much for the episode of Andromeda. Next to it was that of Prometheus. Rock and iron form his bonds, and Hercules is armed with bow and spear. The bird was feasting upon his belly, and standing just ripping it open, or rather had already ripped it open, its beak dipped into the wound, and it seemed to be digging about in it, looking for the sufferer’s liver, which could just be seen, by the depth to which the painter had depicted the wound as being open, and it was pressing the sharp points of its claws into Prometheus’ thigh.
 He, in agony, is all drawn up, twisting himself on to his side, and lifts up his thigh; but to his own harm, for this does but bring the bird nearer to his liver. The other leg is stretched out straight right down to his feet, and the tension of it can be seen actually into the toes. His torture is shewn by the rest of the representation of him; his eyebrows are arched, his lips drawn up, his teeth shewn; you cannot help feeling pity even for what you know is only a picture. Then Hercules is coming to bring help to him in his distress; he stands just about to shoot at his torturer; the arrow is fitted to the bow; with his left hand he is drawing it to its full extent, while he holds his right hand back against his breast, and as he draws the string his arm, viewed from behind, appears somewhat foreshortened. All seem in motion at once—the bow, the string, the arrow, the hand which holds it; the bow is bent by means of the string, the string is made to run double by means of the hand, the hand is at rest upon the hero’s breast. The countenance of Prometheus has a mixed look of hope and fear; he looks partly at his wound, partly at Hercules; he would like to fix all his gaze upon the hero, but his agony robs him of half of the sight of him.belly, and standing just ripping it open, or rather had already ripped it open, its beak dipped into the wound, and it seemed to be digging about in it, looking for the sufferer’s liver, which could just be seen, by the depth to which the painter had depicted the wound as being open, and it was pressing the sharp points of its claws into Prometheus’ thigh. He, in agony, is all drawn up, twisting himself on to his side, and lifts up his thigh; but to his own harm, for this does but bring the bird nearer to his liver. The other leg is stretched out straight right down to his feet, and the tension of it can be seen actually into the toes. His torture is shewn by the rest of the representation of him; his eyebrows are arched, his lips drawn up, his teeth shewn; you cannot help feeling pity even for what you know is only a picture. Then Hercules is coming to bring help to him in his distress; he stands just about to shoot at his torturer; the arrow is fitted to the bow; with his left hand he is drawing it to its full extent, while he holds his right hand back against his breast, and as he draws the string his arm, viewed from behind, appears somewhat foreshortened. All seem in motion at once—the bow, the string, the arrow, the hand which holds it; the bow is bent by means of the string, the string is made to run double by means of the hand, the hand is at rest upon the hero’s breast. The countenance of Prometheus has a mixed look of hope and fear; he looks partly at his wound, partly at Hercules; he would like to fix all his gaze upon the hero, but his agony robs him of half of the sight of him.
 Having waited therefore two days and somewhat refreshed ourselves after our troubles, we hired an Egyptian boat (we had just a little money which we happened to have kept in our belts), and started by the Nile towards Alexandria; there we purposed to make some stay and thought it was just possible that we might find that some of our shipwrecked friends had arrived there. We had arrived at a certain town, when suddenly we heard a great shouting. “The herdsmen,” cried the skipper, and tried to put the boat about and sail back; but already the place was full of terrifying savage men, all tall, dark-coloured (yet not absolutely black like an Indian, but more like a bastard Ethiopian), with shaven heads, small feet, and gross bodies: all spoke an outlandish jargon. “ We are done for,” cried the helmsman, and brought the boat to a standstill, for the river is there very narrow; and four of the robbers boarded her, took all that there was in her, and snatched our money from us; then tying us up they shut us into a little hut and went away, setting a guard over us, with the intention of taking us before their king the following day: “king” is the name they gave to the robber-chief, and it would be a journey of two days, as we learned from those who had been made prisoners along with us. When the night had come on, and we lay, bound as we were, and our guards were asleep, I began, as indeed I might, to mourn Leucippe’s fate, and, counting up how great were her woes of which I was the cause, to bewail them deep in my soul, while hiding inwardly the sound of my grief.
 “O all ye gods and guardian angels,” said I, “if really ye exist and can hear me, what great wrong have we done to be plunged in such a sea of troubles in so short a space of time? Now have you also delivered us over into the hands of Egyptian robbers, so that we have not even a chance of pity. A Greek buccaneer might be moved by the human voice, prayer might soften him: for speech is often the go-between of compassion; the tongue, ministering to him that is in anguish of soul by helping him to express supplication, subdues the fury of the listener’s mind. But, as things are, in what language are we to make our prayers? What oaths can we pour out? I might be more persuasive than the Sirens, but the murderer would not listen to me; I can only make my supplications by signs and explain my prayers for mercy by the gestures of my hands. Alack for my mishaps; already, in dumb show, I shall begin my funeral dirge. For my own woes, intolerable as they are, I care less; but yours, Leucippe—how can my lips deplore them, my eyes weep for them? Faithful you were when love’s stress came upon you, gentle and good to your unhappy lover: and here are fine trappings for your wedding! A prison is your bridal chamber, the earth your marriage bed, ropes and cords your necklaces and bracelets, a robber sleeps without as your bridesman, a dirge is your marriage-hymn. Ah, all in vain, O sea, did we give you thanks: now I blame your mercy; you were kinder to those whom you destroyed, and you have destroyed us yet more grievously by keeping us alive; you grudged us death save by a robber’s hand.”while hiding inwardly the sound of my grief. “O all ye gods and guardian angels,” said I, “if really ye exist and can hear me, what great wrong have we done to be plunged in such a sea of troubles in so short a space of time? Now have you also delivered us over into the hands of Egyptian robbers, so that we have not even a chance of pity. A Greek buccaneer might be moved by the human voice, prayer might soften him: for speech is often the go-between of compassion; the tongue, ministering to him that is in anguish of soul by helping him to express supplication, subdues the fury of the listener’s mind. But, as things are, in what language are we to make our prayers? What oaths can we pour out? I might be more persuasive than the Sirens, but the murderer would not listen to me; I can only make my supplications by signs and explain my prayers for mercy by the gestures of my hands. Alack for my mishaps; already, in dumb show, I shall begin my funeral dirge. For my own woes, intolerable as they are, I care less; but yours, Leucippe—how can my lips deplore them, my eyes weep for them? Faithful you were when love’s stress came upon you, gentle and good to your unhappy lover: and here are fine trappings for your wedding! A prison is your bridal chamber, the earth your marriage bed, ropes and cords your necklaces and bracelets, a robber sleeps without as your bridesman, a dirge is your marriage-hymn. Ah, all in vain, O sea, did we give you thanks: now I blame your mercy; you were kinder to those whom you destroyed, and you have destroyed us yet more grievously by keeping us alive; you grudged us death save by a robber’s hand.” 11.
 Thus did I silently lament, but I could not weep—a peculiarity of the eyes in excessive sorrows. For when disasters are but moderate, tears flow freely, and serve for the sufferer as intercessions addressed to him that inflicts the suffering; they relieve an aching heart like the draining of a swollen wound. But when misfortunes are overwhelming, even tears fail and are traitors to the eyes; grief meets them as they well up, depresses their rise, conducts them away into other channels, and takes them back again below with itself, and then, diverted from the path of the eyes they flow back upon the soul and aggravate its wound. So I whispered to Leucippe, who lay speechless; “Why do you keep silence, my darling, and say no word to me?” “Because, Clitophon,” said she, “my voice is dead, even before the departure of my soul.” Thus conversing, we did not notice the approach of dawn, when a man arrived on horseback, with long and wild hair; his horse too had a full mane and tail, and was bare, without coverings or trappings, after the manner of robbers’ horses. He came from the robber chief, and “If there chance to be a virgin among the captives,” said he, “I am to take her away for the god, to be a propitiatory and cleansing sacrifice for the host.” They at once rushed upon Leucippe, who clung to me and hung upon me screaming; the guards, some dragging her away and Thus did I silently lament, but I could not weep—a peculiarity of the eyes in excessive sorrows. For when disasters are but moderate, tears flow freely, and serve for the sufferer as intercessions addressed to him that inflicts the suffering; they relieve an aching heart like the draining of a swollen wound. But when misfortunes are overwhelming, even tears fail and are traitors to the eyes; grief meets them as they well up, depresses their rise, conducts them away into other channels, and takes them back again below with itself, and then, diverted from the path of the eyes they flow back upon the soul and aggravate its wound. So I whispered to Leucippe, who lay speechless; “Why do you keep silence, my darling, and say no word to me?” “Because, Clitophon,” said she, “my voice is dead, even before the departure of my soul.” Thus conversing, we did not notice the approach of dawn, when a man arrived on horseback, with long and wild hair; his horse too had a full mane and tail, and was bare, without coverings or trappings, after the manner of robbers’ horses. He came from the robber chief, and “If there chance to be a virgin among the captives,” said he, “I am to take her away for the god, to be a propitiatory and cleansing sacrifice for the host.” They at once rushed upon Leucippe, who clung to me and hung upon me screaming; the guards, some dragging her away and some raining blows upon me, took her up and carried her off on their shoulders; us they conveyed, bound, with no such speed.
 We had progressed about a quarter of a mile from the village, when there came to our ears loud shouting and the sound of trumpets, and a regiment of soldiers appeared, all heavily armed. When the robbers saw them, they placed us in the middle of their band and waited for their advance, with the intention of resisting them. Soon they came on, about fifty in number, some with long shields and some with small targets; the robbers, who were far their superior in numbers, picked up clods from the ground and began hurling them at the soldiers. The Egyptian clod is more effective for this purpose than any other, being heavy, jagged, and unlike others, in that the jagged points of it are stones, so that when it is thrown and strikes, it can inflict a double sort of wound—a swelling, as from the blow of a stone, and an actual cut, like that of an arrow. The soldiers, however, received the stony clods on their shields and seemed to make light of the casting of their adversaries; and when the robbers began to tire by reason of their efforts in throwing, they opened their massed ranks, and from behind the shields out ran men lightly armed, each carrying a javelin and a sword, and as they hurled their javelins there was none that failed in his aim. Then the heavy-armed soldiers came in a flood; the battle wassome raining blows upon me, took her up and carried her off on their shoulders; us they conveyed, bound, with no such speed. We had progressed about a quarter of a mile from the village, when there came to our ears loud shouting and the sound of trumpets, and a regiment of soldiers appeared, all heavily armed. When the robbers saw them, they placed us in the middle of their band and waited for their advance, with the intention of resisting them. Soon they came on, about fifty in number, some with long shields and some with small targets; the robbers, who were far their superior in numbers, picked up clods from the ground and began hurling them at the soldiers. The Egyptian clod is more effective for this purpose than any other, being heavy, jagged, and unlike others, in that the jagged points of it are stones, so that when it is thrown and strikes, it can inflict a double sort of wound—a swelling, as from the blow of a stone, and an actual cut, like that of an arrow. The soldiers, however, received the stony clods on their shields and seemed to make light of the casting of their adversaries; and when the robbers began to tire by reason of their efforts in throwing, they opened their massed ranks, and from behind the shields out ran men lightly armed, each carrying a javelin and a sword, and as they hurled their javelins there was none that failed in his aim. Then the heavy-armed soldiers came in a flood; the battle was severe, with plenty of blows, wounds, and slaughter on both sides: the experience of the soldiers compensated for their inferiority in numbers.
 We prisoners, seeing that one flank of the robbers was weakening, made a concerted rush, broke through their line, and ran to join the enemy; they at first did not realise the position, and were ready to slay us, but when they saw that we were unarmed and bound, they suspected the truth, received us within the protection of their lines, and sent us to the rear and allowed us to remain there quietly. Meanwhile a large body of horse charged up; on their approach they spread out their wings and completely surrounded the robbers, and thus herding them together into a narrow space began to butcher them. Some were lying killed, some, half-dead, went on fighting; the rest they took alive. It was now late afternoon, and the general took each of us separately aside, enquiring of us who we were and how we had been captured; each related his own story, and I mine. So when he had heard all, he bade us follow him, and said that he would give us arms. His intention was to wait for the rest of his forces and then attack the great robbers’ stronghold; there were said to be about ten thousand of them there. I asked for a horse, being well versed in the art of riding, and when one came, I rode him about and went through the various evolutions of cavalry fighting, so that the general was greatly pleased with me; on that same day he made me a companion of his own table, and at dinner he asked me about my story, and, when hesevere, with plenty of blows, wounds, and slaughter on both sides: the experience of the soldiers compensated for their inferiority in numbers. We prisoners, seeing that one flank of the robbers was weakening, made a concerted rush, broke through their line, and ran to join the enemy; they at first did not realise the position, and were ready to slay us, but when they saw that we were unarmed and bound, they suspected the truth, received us within the protection of their lines, and sent us to the rear and allowed us to remain there quietly. Meanwhile a large body of horse charged up; on their approach they spread out their wings and completely surrounded the robbers, and thus herding them together into a narrow space began to butcher them. Some were lying killed, some, half-dead, went on fighting; the rest they took alive. It was now late afternoon, and the general took each of us separately aside, enquiring of us who we were and how we had been captured; each related his own story, and I mine. So when he had heard all, he bade us follow him, and said that he would give us arms. His intention was to wait for the rest of his forces and then attack the great robbers’ stronghold; there were said to be about ten thousand of them there. I asked for a horse, being well versed in the art of riding, and when one came, I rode him about and went through the various evolutions of cavalry fighting, so that the general was greatly pleased with me; on that same day he made me a companion of his own table, and at dinner he asked me about my story, and, when he heard it, was moved with pity.
 When a man hears of another’s misfortunes, he is inclined towards pity, and pity is often the introduction to friendship; the heart is softened by grief for what it hears, and gradually feeling the same emotions at the mournful story converts its commiseration into friendship and the grief into pity. So much did I move the general by my recital that I forced him to weep. More we could not do, Leucippe being in the robbers’ power. He also gave me an Egyptian servant to attend to me. On the next day he made preparations to fill up and so cross over a wide trench which lay in our way: for on the other side of it we could see the robbers standing in great numbers and fully armed; they had an improvised altar made of mud and a coffin near it. Then two of them led up the girl, her hands tied behind her back. I could not see who they were, as they were in full armour, but I recognized her as Leucippe. First they poured libations over her head and led her round the altar while, to the accompaniment of a pipe, a priest chanted what seemed to be an Egyptian hymn; this at least was indicated by the movements of his lips and the contortions of his features. Then, at a concerted sign, all retired to some distance from the altar; one of the two young attendants laid her downheard it, was moved with pity. When a man hears of another’s misfortunes, he is inclined towards pity, and pity is often the introduction to friendship; the heart is softened by grief for what it hears, and gradually feeling the same emotions at the mournful story converts its commiseration into friendship and the grief into pity. So much did I move the general by my recital that I forced him to weep. More we could not do, Leucippe being in the robbers’ power. He also gave me an Egyptian servant to attend to me. On the next day he made preparations to fill up and so cross over a wide trench which lay in our way: for on the other side of it we could see the robbers standing in great numbers and fully armed; they had an improvised altar made of mud and a coffin near it. Then two of them led up the girl, her hands tied behind her back. I could not see who they were, as they were in full armour, but I recognized her as Leucippe. First they poured libations over her head and led her round the altar while, to the accompaniment of a pipe, a priest chanted what seemed to be an Egyptian hymn; this at least was indicated by the movements of his lips and the contortions of his features. Then, at a concerted sign, all retired to some distance from the altar; one of the two young attendants laid her down on her back, and strapped her so by means of pegs fixed in the ground, just as the statuaries represent Marsyas fixed to the tree; then he took a sword and plunging it in about the region of the heart, drew it down to the lower part of the belly, opening up her body; the bowels gushed out, and these they drew forth in their hands and placed upon the altar; and when they were roasted, the whole body of them cut them up into small pieces, divided them into shares and ate them.
 The soldiers and the general who were looking on cried out as each stage of the deed was done and averted their eyes from the sight. I sat gazing in my consternation, rooted to the spot by the horror of the spectacle; the immeasurable calamity struck me, as by lightning, motionless. Perhaps the story of Niobe was no fiction; she too, suffering some such woe as I, may, at the destruction of her children, have become so fixed and motionless, that she seemed to be made of stone. When the business came, as I thought, to an end, the two attendants placed her body in the coffin, put the lid upon it, overturned the altar, and hurried away without looking round; such were the instructions given to them by the priest in the liturgy which he chanted. Evening come, the whole trench was filled up, the soldiers crossed it, pitched their camp a little beyond it, and set about preparing their supper, while the general tried to console me in my misery. Nevertheless about the first watch of the night, waiting until all were asleep, I took my sword and went forth, intending to kill myself over the coffin. When I had arrived at the spot, I held out the sword, and, “Leucippe,” said I, “wretched Leucippe,on her back, and strapped her so by means of pegs fixed in the ground, just as the statuaries represent Marsyas fixed to the tree; then he took a sword and plunging it in about the region of the heart, drew it down to the lower part of the belly, opening up her body; the bowels gushed out, and these they drew forth in their hands and placed upon the altar; and when they were roasted, the whole body of them cut them up into small pieces, divided them into shares and ate them. The soldiers and the general who were looking on cried out as each stage of the deed was done and averted their eyes from the sight. I sat gazing in my consternation, rooted to the spot by the horror of the spectacle; the immeasurable calamity struck me, as by lightning, motionless. Perhaps the story of Niobe was no fiction; she too, suffering some such woe as I, may, at the destruction of her children, have become so fixed and motionless, that she seemed to be made of stone. When the business came, as I thought, to an end, the two attendants placed her body in the coffin, put the lid upon it, overturned the altar, and hurried away without looking round; such were the instructions given to them by the priest in the liturgy which he chanted. Evening come, the whole trench was filled up, the soldiers crossed it, pitched their camp a little beyond it, and set about preparing their supper, while the general tried to console me in my misery. Nevertheless about the first watch of the night, waiting until all were asleep, I took my sword and went forth, intending to kill myself over the coffin. When I had arrived at the spot, I held out the sword, and, “Leucippe,” said I, “wretched Leucippe, most ill-fated of mankind, it is not thy death alone that I mourn, nor thy death in a strange land, nor the violence of thy murder, but I grieve at the mockeries added to thy woes—that thou didst become a purifying sacrifice for the bodies of the most impure of men; that, still alive, thou wast ripped up and couldst see the torture with thine own eyes; that division was made of the secret and inner parts of thy belly, to receive its burial upon this ill-starred altar and in this ill-starred coffin.
 Here lies the shell of thy carcase, but its entrails where? If the fire had consumed them, thy fate would have been more tolerable; but now has the burial of them been at the same time the robbers’ sustenance. Accursed requiem at an accursed altar! Horrible and new-fangled banquet! At a sacrifice such as this the gods looked down—and yet the fire was not quenched, but was allowed to pollute itself and carry up to heaven the savour of such an offering! Receive then, Leucippe, from me the only fitting expiatory offering.” With these words I raised my sword on high, intending to plunge it into my throat, when I saw two figures—the moon was shining—running towards me from in front. I therefore stayed my hand, thinking them to be two of the robbers, in order to meet my death at their hands. They approached and shouted aloud; they were Menelaus and Satyrus! When I saw that they were friends, and all unexpectedly still alive, I neither embraced them, nor had I the astonishment of joy; my grief for my misfortunes had made me dumb. They seized mymost ill-fated of mankind, it is not thy death alone that I mourn, nor thy death in a strange land, nor the violence of thy murder, but I grieve at the mockeries added to thy woes—that thou didst become a purifying sacrifice for the bodies of the most impure of men; that, still alive, thou wast ripped up and couldst see the torture with thine own eyes; that division was made of the secret and inner parts of thy belly, to receive its burial upon this ill-starred altar and in this ill-starred coffin. Here lies the shell of thy carcase, but its entrails where? If the fire had consumed them, thy fate would have been more tolerable; but now has the burial of them been at the same time the robbers’ sustenance. Accursed requiem at an accursed altar! Horrible and new-fangled banquet! At a sacrifice such as this the gods looked down—and yet the fire was not quenched, but was allowed to pollute itself and carry up to heaven the savour of such an offering! Receive then, Leucippe, from me the only fitting expiatory offering.” With these words I raised my sword on high, intending to plunge it into my throat, when I saw two figures—the moon was shining—running towards me from in front. I therefore stayed my hand, thinking them to be two of the robbers, in order to meet my death at their hands. They approached and shouted aloud; they were Menelaus and Satyrus! When I saw that they were friends, and all unexpectedly still alive, I neither embraced them, nor had I the astonishment of joy; my grief for my misfortunes had made me dumb. They seized my hand and tried to wrest away the sword from me; but “By all the gods” said I, “do not grudge me a death that is honourable, nay, is a cure for my woes; I cannot endure to live, even though you now constrain me, after Leucippe has thus been murdered.
 You can take away this sword of mine from me, but the sword of my grief has already stuck fast within me, and is little by little wounding me to death. Do you prefer that I should die by a death that never dies?” “If this is your reason for killing yourself,” said Menelaus, “you may indeed withold your sword; your Leucippe will now at once live once more” “Do you still mock me,” said I, looking steadily at him, “in this my great woe? Bravo, Menelaus—you had regard to Zeus, the god that protects the guest. “But he knocked upon the lid of the coffin, and said, “Since Clitophon is still an unbeliever, do you, Leucippe, bear me witness if you are yet alive.” As he spoke, he struck the coffin two or three times in different places, and I heard a faint voice come from beneath; a shuddering instantly took hold of me, and I looked hard at Menelaus, thinking him a wizard; then he opened the coffin, and out came Leucippe—a shocking and horrible sight, God wot. Her belly seemed ripped open and deprived of all its entrails, but she fell upon my neck and embraced me; we clung together and both fell to the ground. When I had with difficulty come again to myself, I said to Menelaus, “Tell me, what is this? Is not this Leucippe whom I see, and hold, and hearhand and tried to wrest away the sword from me; but “By all the gods” said I, “do not grudge me a death that is honourable, nay, is a cure for my woes; I cannot endure to live, even though you now constrain me, after Leucippe has thus been murdered. You can take away this sword of mine from me, but the sword of my grief has already stuck fast within me, and is little by little wounding me to death. Do you prefer that I should die by a death that never dies?” “If this is your reason for killing yourself,” said Menelaus, “you may indeed withold your sword; your Leucippe will now at once live once more” “Do you still mock me,” said I, looking steadily at him, “in this my great woe? Bravo, Menelaus—you had regard to Zeus, the god that protects the guest. “But he knocked upon the lid of the coffin, and said, “Since Clitophon is still an unbeliever, do you, Leucippe, bear me witness if you are yet alive.” As he spoke, he struck the coffin two or three times in different places, and I heard a faint voice come from beneath; a shuddering instantly took hold of me, and I looked hard at Menelaus, thinking him a wizard; then he opened the coffin, and out came Leucippe—a shocking and horrible sight, God wot. Her belly seemed ripped open and deprived of all its entrails, but she fell upon my neck and embraced me; we clung together and both fell to the ground. When I had with difficulty come again to myself, I said to Menelaus, “Tell me, what is this? Is not this Leucippe whom I see, and hold, and hear her speaking? What was it then that I saw yesterday? Either that was a dream, or else this is.
 But certainly this is a real, living kiss, as was of old Leucippe’s sweet embrace.” “Yes,” said Menelaus, “and now she will get her entrails back again, the wound in her breast shall close, and you shall see her whole and sound. But cover your face, I am going to invoke the assistance of Hecate in the task.” I believed him and veiled myself, while he began to conjure and to utter some incantation; and as he spoke he removed the deceptive contrivances which had been fitted to Leucippe’s belly, and restored it to its original condition. Then he said to me, “Uncover yourself”; with some hesitation and full of fright (for I really thought that Hecate was there), I at length removed my hands from my eyes and saw Leucippe whole and restored. Still more greatly astonished, I implored Menelaus, saying; “Menelaus, my best of friends, if you are really a minister of the gods, where am I and what is this I see? “Hereupon Leucippe broke in. “Stop teasing and frightening him, Menelaus,” said she, “and tell him how you cheated the robbers.” So Menelaus began his story. “You know,” said he, “that I am an Egyptian by birth; I told you so before, on the ship; most of my property is near this village, and the chief people here are acquaintances of mine. Well, when we had suffered shipwreck, the tide brought me to the shores of Egypt, and I, with Satyrus, was captured by theher speaking? What was it then that I saw yesterday? Either that was a dream, or else this is. But certainly this is a real, living kiss, as was of old Leucippe’s sweet embrace.” “Yes,” said Menelaus, “and now she will get her entrails back again, the wound in her breast shall close, and you shall see her whole and sound. But cover your face, I am going to invoke the assistance of Hecate in the task.” I believed him and veiled myself, while he began to conjure and to utter some incantation; and as he spoke he removed the deceptive contrivances which had been fitted to Leucippe’s belly, and restored it to its original condition. Then he said to me, “Uncover yourself”; with some hesitation and full of fright (for I really thought that Hecate was there), I at length removed my hands from my eyes and saw Leucippe whole and restored. Still more greatly astonished, I implored Menelaus, saying; “Menelaus, my best of friends, if you are really a minister of the gods, where am I and what is this I see? “Hereupon Leucippe broke in. “Stop teasing and frightening him, Menelaus,” said she, “and tell him how you cheated the robbers.” So Menelaus began his story. “You know,” said he, “that I am an Egyptian by birth; I told you so before, on the ship; most of my property is near this village, and the chief people here are acquaintances of mine. Well, when we had suffered shipwreck, the tide brought me to the shores of Egypt, and I, with Satyrus, was captured by the robbers who were on guard in this part of it.
 When I was brought before the robber-chief, some of them at once recognized me, struck off my chains, and bade me be of good cheer and join their company, as a friend ought to do. I begged to have Satyrus too, as being my servant. ‘Yes,’ said they, ‘if you will first prove yourself a courageous companion.’ At this time it happened that they had received an oracle that that they should sacrifice a maiden and so purify the robber-camp, devouring her liver after her sacrifice; they were then to put the rest of her body in a coffin and retire from the spot, and all this was to be done so that the opposing army would have to march over the spot where the sacrifice had taken place. Do you now relate the rest, Satyrus; from this point the story is yours.” “When I was brought by force to the robbers’ camp,” said Satyrus, continuing the story, “I wept, master, and lamented when I heard about Leucippe, and implored Menelaus to save the maiden, and some kindly deity assisted us. On the day before the sacrifice we happened to be sitting on the seashore and thinking how we could effect this end, when some of the robbers seeing a ship wandering and ignorant of her course, attacked her; those on board, realising the character of their assailants, tried to put her about, but the robbers being too quick for them, they made preparations to resist. Now thererobbers who were on guard in this part of it. When I was brought before the robber-chief, some of them at once recognized me, struck off my chains, and bade me be of good cheer and join their company, as a friend ought to do. I begged to have Satyrus too, as being my servant. ‘Yes,’ said they, ‘if you will first prove yourself a courageous companion.’ At this time it happened that they had received an oracle that that they should sacrifice a maiden and so purify the robber-camp, devouring her liver after her sacrifice; they were then to put the rest of her body in a coffin and retire from the spot, and all this was to be done so that the opposing army would have to march over the spot where the sacrifice had taken place. Do you now relate the rest, Satyrus; from this point the story is yours.” “When I was brought by force to the robbers’ camp,” said Satyrus, continuing the story, “I wept, master, and lamented when I heard about Leucippe, and implored Menelaus to save the maiden, and some kindly deity assisted us. On the day before the sacrifice we happened to be sitting on the seashore and thinking how we could effect this end, when some of the robbers seeing a ship wandering and ignorant of her course, attacked her; those on board, realising the character of their assailants, tried to put her about, but the robbers being too quick for them, they made preparations to resist. Now there was among the passengers one of those actors who recite Homer in the public theatres: he armed himself with his Homeric gear and did the same for his companions, and did his best to repel the invaders.
 Against the first comers of the attacking party they made a good fight, but several of the pirate boats coming up, the enemy sank the ship and murdered the passengers as they jumped off. They did not notice that a certain chest fell from the boat and this, after the ship had gone to pieces, was washed ashore near us by the tide. Menelaus found it, and retiring with it—I was with him—expected that there might be something of value in it, and opened it. We saw there a cloak and a dagger; the latter had a handle a foot long with a very short blade fitted to it not more than three inches in length. Menelaus took out the dagger and casually turned it over, blade downwards, when the blade suddenly shot out from the handle so that handle and blade were now of equal size; and when turned back again, the blade sank back to its original length. This had doubtless been used in the theatre by that unlucky actor for sham murders. “‘We shall have the help of Heaven,’ said I to Menelaus, ‘if you will shew yourself a good fellow: we shall be able to trick the robbers and save the girl. Listen to my plan. We must take a sheep’s skin, as thin a one as we can get, and sew it into the form of a pouch, about the size of a man’s belly; then we must fill it with some animal’swas among the passengers one of those actors who recite Homer in the public theatres: he armed himself with his Homeric gear and did the same for his companions, and did his best to repel the invaders. Against the first comers of the attacking party they made a good fight, but several of the pirate boats coming up, the enemy sank the ship and murdered the passengers as they jumped off. They did not notice that a certain chest fell from the boat and this, after the ship had gone to pieces, was washed ashore near us by the tide. Menelaus found it, and retiring with it—I was with him—expected that there might be something of value in it, and opened it. We saw there a cloak and a dagger; the latter had a handle a foot long with a very short blade fitted to it not more than three inches in length. Menelaus took out the dagger and casually turned it over, blade downwards, when the blade suddenly shot out from the handle so that handle and blade were now of equal size; and when turned back again, the blade sank back to its original length. This had doubtless been used in the theatre by that unlucky actor for sham murders. “‘We shall have the help of Heaven,’ said I to Menelaus, ‘if you will shew yourself a good fellow: we shall be able to trick the robbers and save the girl. Listen to my plan. We must take a sheep’s skin, as thin a one as we can get, and sew it into the form of a pouch, about the size of a man’s belly; then we must fill it with some animal’s entrails and blood, sew up this sham stomach so that its contents cannot easily leak out, and fit her to it by putting a dress outside and fastening it with bands and girdles we can thus hide the whole contrivance.
 The oracle is extremely useful to us for our stratagem, as it has ordered that she is to be fully adorned and must thus be ripped up through her clothes. You see the mechanism of this dagger; if it is pressed against a body, the blade retreats into the handle, as into a sheath; all those who are looking on think that it is actually plunged into the flesh, whereas it has really sprung back into the hollow of the handle, leaving only this point exposed, which is just enough to slit the sham stomach, and the handle will be flush with the thing struck: when it is withdrawn from the wound, the blade leaps forth from its cavity in proportion as the hilt is raised and deceives the spectators just as when it was plunged in: they think that so much of it penetrated at the stroke as now springs out by its mechanism. This being so, the robbers cannot perceive the trick, for the sheepskin is hidden away: at the blow the entrails will gush forth and we will take them and sacrifice them on the altar. After that the robbers will not approach the body, and we will put it into the coffin. You heard the robber-chief say a little while ago that you must give them someentrails and blood, sew up this sham stomach so that its contents cannot easily leak out, and fit her to it by putting a dress outside and fastening it with bands and girdles we can thus hide the whole contrivance. The oracle is extremely useful to us for our stratagem, as it has ordered that she is to be fully adorned and must thus be ripped up through her clothes. You see the mechanism of this dagger; if it is pressed against a body, the blade retreats into the handle, as into a sheath; all those who are looking on think that it is actually plunged into the flesh, whereas it has really sprung back into the hollow of the handle, leaving only this point exposed, which is just enough to slit the sham stomach, and the handle will be flush with the thing struck: when it is withdrawn from the wound, the blade leaps forth from its cavity in proportion as the hilt is raised and deceives the spectators just as when it was plunged in: they think that so much of it penetrated at the stroke as now springs out by its mechanism. This being so, the robbers cannot perceive the trick, for the sheepskin is hidden away: at the blow the entrails will gush forth and we will take them and sacrifice them on the altar. After that the robbers will not approach the body, and we will put it into the coffin. You heard the robber-chief say a little while ago that you must give them some proof of your courage, so that you can now go to him and undertake this service as the proof required.
 ’ After these words I prayed, calling upon Zeus the god of strangers, remembering before him the common table at which we had eaten and our common shipwreck. “‘It is a great undertaking,’ said this good fellow,’ but for a friend—even if one must perish—danger is noble and death sweet.’ ‘I think,’ I added, ‘that Clitophon also is still alive: the maiden told me that she had left him in bonds among the robbers’ captives, and those of the band who had escaped to the robber-chief mentioned that their prisoners had all slipped out of the battle and reached the enemy’s camp: you will thus be earning his warmest gratitude and at the same time rescue a poor girl from so cruel a fate.’ He agreed with what I said, and Fortune favoured us. So I set about making the preparations for our stratagem, while Menelaus was just about to broach the subject of the sacrifice to the robbers, when the robber-chief by the instigation of Providence anticipated him, saying: ‘It is a custom among us that those who are being initiated into our band should perform the sacred rites; particularly when there is a question of sacrificing a human being. It is time therefore to get yourself ready for to-morrow’s sacrifice, and your servant will have to be initiated at the same time as yourself.’ ‘Certainly,’ said Menelaus, ‘and we shall try to show ourselves as good men as any of you. But it must be our business to arrange the maiden as may be most convenient for the operation.’ ‘Yes,’ said the robber-chief, ‘the victim is wholly your charge.’ We therefore dressed her up in the manner I haveproof of your courage, so that you can now go to him and undertake this service as the proof required.’ After these words I prayed, calling upon Zeus the god of strangers, remembering before him the common table at which we had eaten and our common shipwreck. “‘It is a great undertaking,’ said this good fellow,’ but for a friend—even if one must perish—danger is noble and death sweet.’ ‘I think,’ I added, ‘that Clitophon also is still alive: the maiden told me that she had left him in bonds among the robbers’ captives, and those of the band who had escaped to the robber-chief mentioned that their prisoners had all slipped out of the battle and reached the enemy’s camp: you will thus be earning his warmest gratitude and at the same time rescue a poor girl from so cruel a fate.’ He agreed with what I said, and Fortune favoured us. So I set about making the preparations for our stratagem, while Menelaus was just about to broach the subject of the sacrifice to the robbers, when the robber-chief by the instigation of Providence anticipated him, saying: ‘It is a custom among us that those who are being initiated into our band should perform the sacred rites; particularly when there is a question of sacrificing a human being. It is time therefore to get yourself ready for to-morrow’s sacrifice, and your servant will have to be initiated at the same time as yourself.’ ‘Certainly,’ said Menelaus, ‘and we shall try to show ourselves as good men as any of you. But it must be our business to arrange the maiden as may be most convenient for the operation.’ ‘Yes,’ said the robber-chief, ‘the victim is wholly your charge.’ We therefore dressed her up in the manner I have previously described, apart from the others, and told her to be of good courage; we went through all the details with her, telling her to stay inside the coffin, and even if she awoke early from sleep, to wait inside until day appeared.
 ‘If anything goes amiss with us,’ we said, ‘take flight to the hostile camp.’ With these injunctions we led her out to the altar, and the rest you know.” On hearing this story I felt almost out of my senses, and was utterly at a loss how I could make any recompense to Menelaus for his great services to me. I adopted the commonest form of gratitude, falling at his feet, embracing him, and worshipping him as a god, while my heart was inundated with a torrent of joy. But now that all was well in the matter of Leucippe, “What has happened,” I asked, “to Clinias?” “I do not know,” said Menelaus. “Directly after the shipwreck I saw him clinging to the yard-arm, but I do not know whither he was carried.” I gave a cry of sorrow even in the midst of my joy; for some god quickly grudged me unalloyed happiness; and now he that was lost through my doing, he who was everything to me after Leucippe, he of all men was in the clutches of the sea, and had lost not only his life, but any hope of burial. “Unkindly ocean,” I cried, “thus to deprive us of the full measure of the mercy thou hast shewn us!” We then returned allpreviously described, apart from the others, and told her to be of good courage; we went through all the details with her, telling her to stay inside the coffin, and even if she awoke early from sleep, to wait inside until day appeared. ‘If anything goes amiss with us,’ we said, ‘take flight to the hostile camp.’ With these injunctions we led her out to the altar, and the rest you know.” On hearing this story I felt almost out of my senses, and was utterly at a loss how I could make any recompense to Menelaus for his great services to me. I adopted the commonest form of gratitude, falling at his feet, embracing him, and worshipping him as a god, while my heart was inundated with a torrent of joy. But now that all was well in the matter of Leucippe, “What has happened,” I asked, “to Clinias?” “I do not know,” said Menelaus. “Directly after the shipwreck I saw him clinging to the yard-arm, but I do not know whither he was carried.” I gave a cry of sorrow even in the midst of my joy; for some god quickly grudged me unalloyed happiness; and now he that was lost through my doing, he who was everything to me after Leucippe, he of all men was in the clutches of the sea, and had lost not only his life, but any hope of burial. “Unkindly ocean,” I cried, “thus to deprive us of the full measure of the mercy thou hast shewn us!” We then returned all together to the camp, and entering my tent passed the rest of the night there, and our adventures soon became the common property of the army.
 At early dawn I took Menelaus to the general and told him the whole story; he was delighted to hear it, and made him one of his companions. To his enquiry as to the size of the enemy’s forces, Menelaus replied that the whole of the village before us was full of desperate fighters, and that the robber-camp was so thickly manned that they must amount to ten thousand. “But these five thousand of ours,” replied the general, “are a match for twenty of theirs, and besides that, very shortly another two thousand will arrive of the troops stationed in the Delta and about Heliopolis ready to fight against these savages.” While he was still speaking, a courier arrived, saying that a messenger had arrived from the camp in the Delta with the news that the two thousand would have to wait for five more days; the savages had stopped making incursions, but just as the force was ready to start, their Sacred Bird had arrived, bearing with him the sepulchre of his father. They were therefore compelled to delay their march for that space of time. “What bird is that,” said I, “which is so greatly honoured? And what is this sepulchre that he carries?” “The bird is called the Phoenix;” was the answer, “he comes from Ethiopia, and is of about a peacock’s size, but the peacock is inferior to him in beauty of colour. His wings are a mixture of gold andtogether to the camp, and entering my tent passed the rest of the night there, and our adventures soon became the common property of the army. At early dawn I took Menelaus to the general and told him the whole story; he was delighted to hear it, and made him one of his companions. To his enquiry as to the size of the enemy’s forces, Menelaus replied that the whole of the village before us was full of desperate fighters, and that the robber-camp was so thickly manned that they must amount to ten thousand. “But these five thousand of ours,” replied the general, “are a match for twenty of theirs, and besides that, very shortly another two thousand will arrive of the troops stationed in the Delta and about Heliopolis ready to fight against these savages.” While he was still speaking, a courier arrived, saying that a messenger had arrived from the camp in the Delta with the news that the two thousand would have to wait for five more days; the savages had stopped making incursions, but just as the force was ready to start, their Sacred Bird had arrived, bearing with him the sepulchre of his father. They were therefore compelled to delay their march for that space of time. “What bird is that,” said I, “which is so greatly honoured? And what is this sepulchre that he carries?” “The bird is called the Phoenix;” was the answer, “he comes from Ethiopia, and is of about a peacock’s size, but the peacock is inferior to him in beauty of colour. His wings are a mixture of gold and scarlet; he is proud to acknowledge the Sun as his lord, and his head is witness of his allegiance, which is crowned with a magnificent halo—a circular halo is the symbol of the sun.
 It is of a deep magenta colour, like that of the rose, of great beauty, with spreading rays where the feathers spring. The Ethiopians enjoy his presence during his life-time, the Egyptians at his death; when he dies—and he is subject to death after a long period of years—his son makes a sepulchre for him and carries him to the Nile. He digs out with his beak a ball of myrrh of the sweetest savour and hollows it out in the middle sufficiently to take the body of a bird; the hollow that he has dug out is employed as a coffin for the corpse. He puts the bird in and fits it into the receptacle, and then, after sealing up the cavity with clay, flies to the Nile, carrying with him the result of his labours. An escort of other birds accompanies him, as a bodyguard attends a migrating king, and he never fails to make straight for Heliopolis, the dead bird’s last destination. Then he perches upon a high spot and awaits the coming of the attendants of the god; an Egyptian priest goes out, carrying with him a book from the sacred shrine, and assures himself that he is the genuine bird from his likeness toscarlet; he is proud to acknowledge the Sun as his lord, and his head is witness of his allegiance, which is crowned with a magnificent halo—a circular halo is the symbol of the sun. It is of a deep magenta colour, like that of the rose, of great beauty, with spreading rays where the feathers spring. The Ethiopians enjoy his presence during his life-time, the Egyptians at his death; when he dies—and he is subject to death after a long period of years—his son makes a sepulchre for him and carries him to the Nile. He digs out with his beak a ball of myrrh of the sweetest savour and hollows it out in the middle sufficiently to take the body of a bird; the hollow that he has dug out is employed as a coffin for the corpse. He puts the bird in and fits it into the receptacle, and then, after sealing up the cavity with clay, flies to the Nile, carrying with him the result of his labours. An escort of other birds accompanies him, as a bodyguard attends a migrating king, and he never fails to make straight for Heliopolis, the dead bird’s last destination. Then he perches upon a high spot and awaits the coming of the attendants of the god; an Egyptian priest goes out, carrying with him a book from the sacred shrine, and assures himself that he is the genuine bird from his likeness to the picture which he possesses.
 The bird knows that he may be doubted, and displays every part, even the most private, of his body. Afterwards he exhibits the corpse and delivers, as it were, a funeral panegyric on his departed father; then the attendant-priests of the Sun take the dead bird and bury him. It is thus true that during life the Phoenix is an Ethiopian by right of nurture, but at his death he becomes an Egyptian by right of burial.”the picture which he possesses. The bird knows that he may be doubted, and displays every part, even the most private, of his body. Afterwards he exhibits the corpse and delivers, as it were, a funeral panegyric on his departed father; then the attendant-priests of the Sun take the dead bird and bury him. It is thus true that during life the Phoenix is an Ethiopian by right of nurture, but at his death he becomes an Egyptian by right of burial.” 1.
 When the general heard of the amount and equipment of his adversaries’ forces as well as the delay of his own succours, he decided to turn back to to the village whence we had set out until the reinforcements should appear. Leucippe and I had a house assigned to us a little beyond the general’s lodging. After entering it, I took her in my arms and desired to exercise the rights of a husband; but as she would not allow me to do so, “How long,” said I, “are we to be deprived of the rites of Aphrodite? Do you take no account of all our mishaps and adventures, shipwrecks, robbers, sacrifices, murders? While we are now in Fortune’s calm, let us make good use of our opportunity, before some other more cruel fate impedes us.” “No,” said she, “this cannot be now at once. Yesterday, when J was weeping at the thought of my coming sacrifice, the goddess Artemis stood before me in a dream and said, ‘Weep no more; thou shalt not die, for I will be thy helper, but thou must remain a virgin, until I deck thee as bride, and none other than Clitophon shall be thy spouse.’ I was disappointed to hear that our happiness must thus be postponed, but glad for the hopes of the future.” Hearing her dream, I remembered that When the general heard of the amount and equipment of his adversaries’ forces as well as the delay of his own succours, he decided to turn back to to the village whence we had set out until the reinforcements should appear. Leucippe and I had a house assigned to us a little beyond the general’s lodging. After entering it, I took her in my arms and desired to exercise the rights of a husband; but as she would not allow me to do so, “How long,” said I, “are we to be deprived of the rites of Aphrodite? Do you take no account of all our mishaps and adventures, shipwrecks, robbers, sacrifices, murders? While we are now in Fortune’s calm, let us make good use of our opportunity, before some other more cruel fate impedes us.” “No,” said she, “this cannot be now at once. Yesterday, when J was weeping at the thought of my coming sacrifice, the goddess Artemis stood before me in a dream and said, ‘Weep no more; thou shalt not die, for I will be thy helper, but thou must remain a virgin, until I deck thee as bride, and none other than Clitophon shall be thy spouse.’ I was disappointed to hear that our happiness must thus be postponed, but glad for the hopes of the future.” Hearing her dream, I remembered that I too had had a similar vision; during the night just past I thought I saw before me Aphrodite’s temple and the goddess’s image within it; but when I came near to make my prayers, the doors were shut.
 I was distressed at this, but then a woman appeared exactly like the statue, saying; “At present you cannot enter the temple, but if you wait for a short time, I will not only open it to you but make you a priest of the goddess.” I related this dream to Leucippe and did not continue my attempts to constrain her, and yet, when I considered and compared Leucippe’s own dream, I was not a little disturbed. Meanwhile Charmides (that was the general’s name) cast his eyes upon Leucippe, and this is how the business began. It so happened that some men were chasing a river-beast that is well worth seeing—the Nile-horse, as the Egyptians call it. It is like a horse (as the name implies) with regard to its belly and its feet, except that it has cloven hooves; it is about the size of the largest kind of ox; and it has a tail both short and hairless, as is indeed the rest of its body. Its head is round, and of considerable size, with its cheeks like those of a horse; its nostrils wide and breathing out hot vapour, as from a spring of fire; its jaws enormous as its cheeks, and its mouth gaping open right up to its temples; its eye-teeth crooked, in shape and position like those of a wild boar, but about three times as big.I too had had a similar vision; during the night just past I thought I saw before me Aphrodite’s temple and the goddess’s image within it; but when I came near to make my prayers, the doors were shut. I was distressed at this, but then a woman appeared exactly like the statue, saying; “At present you cannot enter the temple, but if you wait for a short time, I will not only open it to you but make you a priest of the goddess.” I related this dream to Leucippe and did not continue my attempts to constrain her, and yet, when I considered and compared Leucippe’s own dream, I was not a little disturbed. Meanwhile Charmides (that was the general’s name) cast his eyes upon Leucippe, and this is how the business began. It so happened that some men were chasing a river-beast that is well worth seeing—the Nile-horse, as the Egyptians call it. It is like a horse (as the name implies) with regard to its belly and its feet, except that it has cloven hooves; it is about the size of the largest kind of ox; and it has a tail both short and hairless, as is indeed the rest of its body. Its head is round, and of considerable size, with its cheeks like those of a horse; its nostrils wide and breathing out hot vapour, as from a spring of fire; its jaws enormous as its cheeks, and its mouth gaping open right up to its temples; its eye-teeth crooked, in shape and position like those of a wild boar, but about three times as big.
 The general called us to watch the spectacle, and Leucippe was with us. We kept our eyes fixed on the animal, the general kept his on Leucippe, and he was straightway Love’s prisoner. Desiring to keep us by him as long as possible, in order thus to feast his eyes, he span out his conversation about the beast; first he described its appearance and character, and then the way it is captured. It is the greediest of all animals, sometimes taking a whole field of corn at a meal, and it is caught by strategy. The huntsmen, you see, observe its tracks, and then dig a pit, roofing it in with straw and earth; under this arrangement of thatch they place at the bottom a wooden box with its cover open up to the top of the pit, and wait for the beast to fall in. When it arrives, in it tumbles, and the box receives it like a trap; the huntsmen then rush out and close the lid and thus gain possession of their prey, since he is so strong that no one can master him by mere force. “Not only is he extremely strong, but his hide, as you may see, is of great thickness, and cannot be penetrated by the steel. He is, one might say, the elephant of Egypt, and indeed in strength he is only second to the Indian elephant.” “Why,” said Menelaus, “have you ever seen an elephant?” “Certainly,” replied Charmides, “and I have heard from experts the extraordinary circumstances connected with its birth.” “We,” said I, “have never seen one up to this time, except in a picture.
 ” “In that case” he said, “I will describe it to you, as we have plenty of time. The female has a long period of pregnancy; for she takes ten years to give form to the seed in her womb, and after that period she brings forth, her offspring being thus already old. This is the reason, I imagine, that he grows in the end to such an enormous bulk, is unconquerable by reason of his strength, and is so long-lived and slow to come to his end; they say that he lives longer than the crow in Hesiod. The elephant’s jaw is like the head of an ox, because to the observer his mouth appears to have two horns; these are, however, in reality the elephant’s curved tusks. Between them grows his trunk, in appearance and size not unlike a trumpet, and very convenient for all that the beast may require; it takes up his food for him or anything that he finds to eat; if it is proper nutriment for an elephant, he takes it at once, and then bending inwards towards his jaw, delivers it to his mouth; but if he sees that it is anything too rich for him, he seizes it, twists up his find in a circle, raises it on high, and offers it as a gift to his master. This master is an Ethiopian who sits on his back, a sort of elephant horseman; the beast fawns on him and fears him, and attends to his voice and submits toexcept in a picture.” “In that case” he said, “I will describe it to you, as we have plenty of time. The female has a long period of pregnancy; for she takes ten years to give form to the seed in her womb, and after that period she brings forth, her offspring being thus already old. This is the reason, I imagine, that he grows in the end to such an enormous bulk, is unconquerable by reason of his strength, and is so long-lived and slow to come to his end; they say that he lives longer than the crow in Hesiod. The elephant’s jaw is like the head of an ox, because to the observer his mouth appears to have two horns; these are, however, in reality the elephant’s curved tusks. Between them grows his trunk, in appearance and size not unlike a trumpet, and very convenient for all that the beast may require; it takes up his food for him or anything that he finds to eat; if it is proper nutriment for an elephant, he takes it at once, and then bending inwards towards his jaw, delivers it to his mouth; but if he sees that it is anything too rich for him, he seizes it, twists up his find in a circle, raises it on high, and offers it as a gift to his master. This master is an Ethiopian who sits on his back, a sort of elephant horseman; the beast fawns on him and fears him, and attends to his voice and submits to be beaten by him, the instrument with which he is beaten being an iron axe.
 I once saw an extraordinary sight; there was a Greek who had put his head right into the middle of the animal’s jaws; it kept its mouth open and breathed upon him as he remained in that position. I was surprised at both, the audacity of the man and the amiability of the elephant; but the man told me that he had in fact given the animal a fee for it, because the beast’s breath was only less sweet than the scents of India, and a sovereign remedy for the headache. The elephant knows that he possesses this power of healing, and will not open his mouth for nothing; he is one of those rascally doctors that insist on having their fee first. When you give it him, he graciously consents, stretches open his jaws, and keeps them agape as long as the man desires; he knows that he has let out on hire the sweetness of his breath.” “From what source,” said I, “does this ugly beast get this delightful scent of his?” “From the character of his food,” said Charmides. “The country of the Indians is close to the sun: they are the first to see the sun-god rising; his rays are very hot when they strike them, and their body preserves the tint due to exposure to his fire. We Greeks have a certain flower as dark as a negro’s skin: in India it is not a flower, but a leaf, such as we find on trees in our country: there, it conceals itsbe beaten by him, the instrument with which he is beaten being an iron axe. I once saw an extraordinary sight; there was a Greek who had put his head right into the middle of the animal’s jaws; it kept its mouth open and breathed upon him as he remained in that position. I was surprised at both, the audacity of the man and the amiability of the elephant; but the man told me that he had in fact given the animal a fee for it, because the beast’s breath was only less sweet than the scents of India, and a sovereign remedy for the headache. The elephant knows that he possesses this power of healing, and will not open his mouth for nothing; he is one of those rascally doctors that insist on having their fee first. When you give it him, he graciously consents, stretches open his jaws, and keeps them agape as long as the man desires; he knows that he has let out on hire the sweetness of his breath.” “From what source,” said I, “does this ugly beast get this delightful scent of his?” “From the character of his food,” said Charmides. “The country of the Indians is close to the sun: they are the first to see the sun-god rising; his rays are very hot when they strike them, and their body preserves the tint due to exposure to his fire. We Greeks have a certain flower as dark as a negro’s skin: in India it is not a flower, but a leaf, such as we find on trees in our country: there, it conceals its fragrance and gives no evidence of its scent; for it either hesitates to vaunt its qualities before those who know them well, or grudges them to those of its own country.
 But if it remove but a little from its own haunts and pass the borders of its own land, it throws open the sweetness that it has hidden, turns into a flower instead of a leaf, and becomes invested with scent. This is the black rose of the Indians; it is the food of the elephant, as is grass to our oxen. Nurtured on it from birth, the whole animal acquires the scent of its food and sends forth its breath endowed with the sweetest savour—its breathing is the origin of its fragrance.” Not very long after the general had made an end of these stories (for he who has suffered Cupid’s attack cannot long endure torture in his fire), he sent for Menelaus and took him by the hand, saying: “Your services to Clitophon shew that you have a genius for friendship; and you shall find the same in me. I ask of you a favour which is quite easy for you to perform; and by granting it you can save my life, if you will. Leucippe is the death of me; do you come to the rescue. She is already in your debt for saving her life; your reward for the service you can do me will be fifty pieces of gold, while she can have as much as she likes.” “No,” said Menelaus, “keep your money for those who make their friendship a matter of barter; I, who am already your friend, will try to be of service to you.” With these words, hefragrance and gives no evidence of its scent; for it either hesitates to vaunt its qualities before those who know them well, or grudges them to those of its own country. But if it remove but a little from its own haunts and pass the borders of its own land, it throws open the sweetness that it has hidden, turns into a flower instead of a leaf, and becomes invested with scent. This is the black rose of the Indians; it is the food of the elephant, as is grass to our oxen. Nurtured on it from birth, the whole animal acquires the scent of its food and sends forth its breath endowed with the sweetest savour—its breathing is the origin of its fragrance.” Not very long after the general had made an end of these stories (for he who has suffered Cupid’s attack cannot long endure torture in his fire), he sent for Menelaus and took him by the hand, saying: “Your services to Clitophon shew that you have a genius for friendship; and you shall find the same in me. I ask of you a favour which is quite easy for you to perform; and by granting it you can save my life, if you will. Leucippe is the death of me; do you come to the rescue. She is already in your debt for saving her life; your reward for the service you can do me will be fifty pieces of gold, while she can have as much as she likes.” “No,” said Menelaus, “keep your money for those who make their friendship a matter of barter; I, who am already your friend, will try to be of service to you.” With these words, he came to me and related the whole story, and we took counsel what to do.
 Our conclusion was that it was best to cozen him; for open opposition was not without danger, in case he should employ force, while flight was impossible, as we were surrounded on every side both by the robbers and by his own very large retinue of soldiers. Menelaus therefore waited a short time, and then returned to Charmides. “Your business is done,” he said. “At first she refused most vehemently, but when I implored her, reminding her that she was under obligations to me, she consented. She makes, however, a reasonable request, and that is a short delay of a few days; ‘Until,’ she says, ‘I arrive at Alexandria; this is only a village, where everything is in the public view, and there are too many here who see everything that goes on.’” “It is a long time to wait,” said Charmides, “for her favours. When one is at war, how can one postpone one’s desires? And when a soldier is just going into battle, how can he know whether he will survive? There are so many different roads to death; if you can get my safety guaranteed to me by Fate, I will wait. I am just going out to fight against buccaneers; but within my soul there is a different kind of conflict. A warrior, armed with bow and arrows, is ravaging me: I am beaten, J am covered with wounds; call, my friend, call quickly the physician that can heal me; the wound is dangerous. I shall carry fire into the country of my enemies; but Love has lit up another kind of torch against me; do you, Menelaus, quench this fire first. Love’s congress would be a fair omencame to me and related the whole story, and we took counsel what to do. Our conclusion was that it was best to cozen him; for open opposition was not without danger, in case he should employ force, while flight was impossible, as we were surrounded on every side both by the robbers and by his own very large retinue of soldiers. Menelaus therefore waited a short time, and then returned to Charmides. “Your business is done,” he said. “At first she refused most vehemently, but when I implored her, reminding her that she was under obligations to me, she consented. She makes, however, a reasonable request, and that is a short delay of a few days; ‘Until,’ she says, ‘I arrive at Alexandria; this is only a village, where everything is in the public view, and there are too many here who see everything that goes on.’” “It is a long time to wait,” said Charmides, “for her favours. When one is at war, how can one postpone one’s desires? And when a soldier is just going into battle, how can he know whether he will survive? There are so many different roads to death; if you can get my safety guaranteed to me by Fate, I will wait. I am just going out to fight against buccaneers; but within my soul there is a different kind of conflict. A warrior, armed with bow and arrows, is ravaging me: I am beaten, J am covered with wounds; call, my friend, call quickly the physician that can heal me; the wound is dangerous. I shall carry fire into the country of my enemies; but Love has lit up another kind of torch against me; do you, Menelaus, quench this fire first. Love’s congress would be a fair omen before we join in battle; let it be Aphrodite that sends me out on my way to Ares.
 ” “But you must see,” said Menelaus, “that it is not easy for her here to trick the one who is her man, especially as he is greatly in love with her.” “Tush,” said Charmides, “it is easy enough to send off Clitophon somewhere else.” Menelaus saw that Charmides was in earnest, and began to fear for my safety; he therefore hastily concocted a plausible excuse saying: “Do you wish to know the real reason of the delay? Only yesterday she began the monthly of women, so that she cannot be approached by a man.” “Very well then,” said Charmides, “we must wait here three or four days, which will be quite enough. But ask her to do what is possible; let her at any rate come into my sight and converse with me; I wish to hear her voice, to hold her hand, to touch her—the consolation of lovers. Yes, and I may kiss her too; in her condition there is no objection to this.” When Menelaus came and told me this, I cried out that I would much rather die than see Leucippe’s kiss bestowed upon another. “What,” I said, “can be sweeter than her kiss? Love’s full enjoyment comes to an end and one is soon sated with it—it is nothing, if you take away the kisses from it; the kiss does not come to an end, never brings satiety, and is always fresh. Three very charming things come from the mouth; the breath, the voice, and the kiss; we kiss those whom webefore we join in battle; let it be Aphrodite that sends me out on my way to Ares.” “But you must see,” said Menelaus, “that it is not easy for her here to trick the one who is her man, especially as he is greatly in love with her.” “Tush,” said Charmides, “it is easy enough to send off Clitophon somewhere else.” Menelaus saw that Charmides was in earnest, and began to fear for my safety; he therefore hastily concocted a plausible excuse saying: “Do you wish to know the real reason of the delay? Only yesterday she began the monthly of women, so that she cannot be approached by a man.” “Very well then,” said Charmides, “we must wait here three or four days, which will be quite enough. But ask her to do what is possible; let her at any rate come into my sight and converse with me; I wish to hear her voice, to hold her hand, to touch her—the consolation of lovers. Yes, and I may kiss her too; in her condition there is no objection to this.” When Menelaus came and told me this, I cried out that I would much rather die than see Leucippe’s kiss bestowed upon another. “What,” I said, “can be sweeter than her kiss? Love’s full enjoyment comes to an end and one is soon sated with it—it is nothing, if you take away the kisses from it; the kiss does not come to an end, never brings satiety, and is always fresh. Three very charming things come from the mouth; the breath, the voice, and the kiss; we kiss those whom we love with the lips, but the spring of the pleasure comes from the soul.
 Believe me, Menelaus, when I tell you (for in my troubles I will reveal to you the most sacred secrets), that this is all that even I have received from Leucippe; she is still a virgin; only as far as kisses go she is my spouse; and if another is to ravish these from me, I will not tolerate the rape; there can be no adultery with my kisses.” “It is clear, then,” said Menelaus, “that we need good and speedy counsel. For when a man is in love, he can bear it so long as he cherishes a hope of success, striving eagerly to that very success; once drive him to despair, and lie will transform his desire into a passion to inflict pain in return upon that which stands in his way. And suppose he has power also, so as to inflict, without suffering, an injury, then the fact that his spirit is without fear inflames his fury further; and the opportunity urges him to deal drastically with his difficult situation.” We were still looking for a plan when a man rushed in, greatly disturbed, and told us that Leucippe, while walking abroad, had suddenly fallen down, her eyes rolling; so we jumped up and ran to her, and found her lying on the ground. I went up to her and asked her what was the matter, but no sooner had she seen me than, her eyes all bloodshot, she struck me in the face; and when Menelaus tried to constrain her, she kicked him. This made us understand that she was afflicted with some kind of madness, so that we forcibly seized her and tried tolove with the lips, but the spring of the pleasure comes from the soul. Believe me, Menelaus, when I tell you (for in my troubles I will reveal to you the most sacred secrets), that this is all that even I have received from Leucippe; she is still a virgin; only as far as kisses go she is my spouse; and if another is to ravish these from me, I will not tolerate the rape; there can be no adultery with my kisses.” “It is clear, then,” said Menelaus, “that we need good and speedy counsel. For when a man is in love, he can bear it so long as he cherishes a hope of success, striving eagerly to that very success; once drive him to despair, and lie will transform his desire into a passion to inflict pain in return upon that which stands in his way. And suppose he has power also, so as to inflict, without suffering, an injury, then the fact that his spirit is without fear inflames his fury further; and the opportunity urges him to deal drastically with his difficult situation.” We were still looking for a plan when a man rushed in, greatly disturbed, and told us that Leucippe, while walking abroad, had suddenly fallen down, her eyes rolling; so we jumped up and ran to her, and found her lying on the ground. I went up to her and asked her what was the matter, but no sooner had she seen me than, her eyes all bloodshot, she struck me in the face; and when Menelaus tried to constrain her, she kicked him. This made us understand that she was afflicted with some kind of madness, so that we forcibly seized her and tried to hold her; she struggled against us, however, and cared nothing about what a woman doesn’t want to be seen.
 As a result, a great hubbub arose in the tent, so that the general himself hurried in and saw what was happening. At first he suspected that this illness of hers was but a pretence against his advances, and looked suspiciously at Menelaus; when he saw the truth, as he soon did, he too grieved and felt pity for her. Ropes were therefore brought, and the poor girl tied up. But when I saw the bonds about her wrists, I could not but implore Menelaus (the others had gone away), saying, “Loose them, I beseech you, loose them; these tender hands cannot bear fetters. Leave me with her; I alone will, with my embrace, be the rope to bind her; let her madness rage against me. For what profits it me to live longer? I am here, and Leucippe knows me not; there my love lies bound, and I, heartless wretch, could loose her and will not. Has Fate only saved us from the hands of the robbers for you to become the sport of madness, ill-starred that we were, when we seemed to be most fortunate? We escaped the terrors that awaited us at home, only to suffer shipwreck; we were saved from the sea, . . . .; we were rescued from the robbers, only to find madness waiting for us. Yes, dearest, even if you recover, I still fear the visitation of God has some ill to work upon you. Who can be more wretched than we are, who are in fear even of what seems our good fortune? But do you but once get well and come again to your senses, and let Fortune again play what pranks she will! “hold her; she struggled against us, however, and cared nothing about what a woman doesn’t want to be seen. As a result, a great hubbub arose in the tent, so that the general himself hurried in and saw what was happening. At first he suspected that this illness of hers was but a pretence against his advances, and looked suspiciously at Menelaus; when he saw the truth, as he soon did, he too grieved and felt pity for her. Ropes were therefore brought, and the poor girl tied up. But when I saw the bonds about her wrists, I could not but implore Menelaus (the others had gone away), saying, “Loose them, I beseech you, loose them; these tender hands cannot bear fetters. Leave me with her; I alone will, with my embrace, be the rope to bind her; let her madness rage against me. For what profits it me to live longer? I am here, and Leucippe knows me not; there my love lies bound, and I, heartless wretch, could loose her and will not. Has Fate only saved us from the hands of the robbers for you to become the sport of madness, ill-starred that we were, when we seemed to be most fortunate? We escaped the terrors that awaited us at home, only to suffer shipwreck; we were saved from the sea, . . . .; we were rescued from the robbers, only to find madness waiting for us. Yes, dearest, even if you recover, I still fear the visitation of God has some ill to work upon you. Who can be more wretched than we are, who are in fear even of what seems our good fortune? But do you but once get well and come again to your senses, and let Fortune again play what pranks she will! “ 10.
 At these words of mine Menelaus’ companions tried to comfort me; such troubles, they said, were not lasting, but often occurred at the hot season of youth, when the blood, being young and new, and boiling at its approach to full age, overflows the veins and floods the brain, drowning the fount of reason. It was proper, therefore, to send for doctors and attempt to find a cure. Accordingly, Menelaus approached the general and asked that the army doctor might be called in; the general assented with pleasure, for those in love are glad enough to obey the behests which love lays upon them. When the physician had come: “First,” said he, “we must make her sleep, in order to overcome the violent crisis of the disease from which she is suffering—sleep is the remedy for all illness—and after that we will prescribe a further course of treatment.” With this intention he gave us a small medicament about the size of a nut, bidding us dissolve it in oil and rub the crown of her head with it; later, he said, he would prepare another to purge her. We followed out his instructions, and after being rubbed with the drug she quickly fell asleep and remained so for the rest of the night until morning. I kept watch the whole night long, and as I sat I could not but weep and say, as I beheld her bonds, “Alas, my darling, you are a prisoner even while you slumber; even your sleep is not free. I wonder of what you are dreaming; are you, in your sleep, in your right senses, or are your dreams too those of a madwoman?” But even when she woke, she again At these words of mine Menelaus’ companions tried to comfort me; such troubles, they said, were not lasting, but often occurred at the hot season of youth, when the blood, being young and new, and boiling at its approach to full age, overflows the veins and floods the brain, drowning the fount of reason. It was proper, therefore, to send for doctors and attempt to find a cure. Accordingly, Menelaus approached the general and asked that the army doctor might be called in; the general assented with pleasure, for those in love are glad enough to obey the behests which love lays upon them. When the physician had come: “First,” said he, “we must make her sleep, in order to overcome the violent crisis of the disease from which she is suffering—sleep is the remedy for all illness—and after that we will prescribe a further course of treatment.” With this intention he gave us a small medicament about the size of a nut, bidding us dissolve it in oil and rub the crown of her head with it; later, he said, he would prepare another to purge her. We followed out his instructions, and after being rubbed with the drug she quickly fell asleep and remained so for the rest of the night until morning. I kept watch the whole night long, and as I sat I could not but weep and say, as I beheld her bonds, “Alas, my darling, you are a prisoner even while you slumber; even your sleep is not free. I wonder of what you are dreaming; are you, in your sleep, in your right senses, or are your dreams too those of a madwoman?” But even when she woke, she again cried out some meaningless words; the doctor was at hand, and gave her the other medicine.
 While this was going on, a messenger came from the Satrap of Egypt, bidding the army set forth, and it appears as if the letter must have ordered the general to make haste to give battle, for he at once ordered all his men to arm themselves to engage with the buccaneers. They therefore hurried with all speed to their arms and were soon in readiness with their company-commanders. He then gave them the watchword, bade them encamp, and stayed where he was; on the next morning at day-break he led them out against the enemy. Now the situation of the village held by the robbers was as follows. The Nile flows down in a single stream from Thebes of Egypt as far as Memphis; a little below is a village (Cercasorus is its name), at the end of the undivided body of the river. From that point it breaks up round the land, and three rivers are formed out of one; two streams discharge themselves on either side, while the middle one flows on in the same course as the unbroken river, and forms the Delta in between the two outer branches. None of these three channels reaches the sea in an unbroken state; each, on reaching various cities, splits up further in different directions. The resulting branches are all of them larger than the rivers of Greece, and the water, although socried out some meaningless words; the doctor was at hand, and gave her the other medicine. While this was going on, a messenger came from the Satrap of Egypt, bidding the army set forth, and it appears as if the letter must have ordered the general to make haste to give battle, for he at once ordered all his men to arm themselves to engage with the buccaneers. They therefore hurried with all speed to their arms and were soon in readiness with their company-commanders. He then gave them the watchword, bade them encamp, and stayed where he was; on the next morning at day-break he led them out against the enemy. Now the situation of the village held by the robbers was as follows. The Nile flows down in a single stream from Thebes of Egypt as far as Memphis; a little below is a village (Cercasorus is its name), at the end of the undivided body of the river. From that point it breaks up round the land, and three rivers are formed out of one; two streams discharge themselves on either side, while the middle one flows on in the same course as the unbroken river, and forms the Delta in between the two outer branches. None of these three channels reaches the sea in an unbroken state; each, on reaching various cities, splits up further in different directions. The resulting branches are all of them larger than the rivers of Greece, and the water, although so much subdivided, does not lose its utility, but is used for boats, for drinking, and for agricultural irrigation.
 This great Nile is the centre of their existence—their river, their land, their sea, their lake; it is a strange sight to see close together the boat and the hoe, the oar and the plough, the rudder and the winnowing-fan—the meeting-place of sailors and husbandmen, of fishes and oxen. Where you have sailed, there you sow; where you sow, there is a sea subject to tillage. For the river has its due seasons, and the Egyptian sits and waits for it, counting the days. Nor does the Nile ever deceive; it is a river that keeps its appointments both in the times of its increase and the amount of water that it brings, a river that never allows itself to be convicted of being unpunctual. You may see a conflict between river and land: each struggles with the other, the water to make a sea of so wide an expanse of soil, and the soil to absorb so much fresh water. In the end it is a drawn battle, and neither of the two parties can be said to suffer defeat, for water and land are coextensive and identical. About the haunts of the robbers previously mentioned there is always plenty of water standing; when it floods the land, it forms lakes, and these remain undiminished when the Nile goes down, full of water, and also of the water’s mud. The natives can either walk or row over them, but only in boats just large enough to contain a single passenger (anymuch subdivided, does not lose its utility, but is used for boats, for drinking, and for agricultural irrigation. This great Nile is the centre of their existence—their river, their land, their sea, their lake; it is a strange sight to see close together the boat and the hoe, the oar and the plough, the rudder and the winnowing-fan—the meeting-place of sailors and husbandmen, of fishes and oxen. Where you have sailed, there you sow; where you sow, there is a sea subject to tillage. For the river has its due seasons, and the Egyptian sits and waits for it, counting the days. Nor does the Nile ever deceive; it is a river that keeps its appointments both in the times of its increase and the amount of water that it brings, a river that never allows itself to be convicted of being unpunctual. You may see a conflict between river and land: each struggles with the other, the water to make a sea of so wide an expanse of soil, and the soil to absorb so much fresh water. In the end it is a drawn battle, and neither of the two parties can be said to suffer defeat, for water and land are coextensive and identical. About the haunts of the robbers previously mentioned there is always plenty of water standing; when it floods the land, it forms lakes, and these remain undiminished when the Nile goes down, full of water, and also of the water’s mud. The natives can either walk or row over them, but only in boats just large enough to contain a single passenger (any kind strange to the locality the mud there chokes and stops); theirs are small and light vessels, drawing very little water; if there is no water at all, the boatmen pick up their craft and carry it on their backs until they come to water again.
 In the middle of these lakes lie some islands dotted here and there. Some of them have no houses upon them, but are planted with papyrus, and the stems of it grow so close that there is only just room for a man to stand between them; over the head of this thick jungle the leaves of the plant make a close covering. Robbers therefore can slip in there, make their plans, devise ambushes or lie hid, using the papyrus-plants as their fortifications. Others of the islands have cabins upon them, and present the appearance, the huts being closely packed together, of a town protected by water. These are the resorts of the buccaneers; one of them, larger than the others and with a greater number of cabins upon it, was called, I think, Nicochis; there, as their strongest fastness, they all collected, and took courage both from their numbers and the strength of the position. It was made a peninsula by a narrow causeway, a furlong in length and twelve fathoms broad, on either side of which the waters of the lake entirely surrounded the town. When they saw the general approaching they devised the following stratagem. They collected all their old men and provided them with branches ofkind strange to the locality the mud there chokes and stops); theirs are small and light vessels, drawing very little water; if there is no water at all, the boatmen pick up their craft and carry it on their backs until they come to water again. In the middle of these lakes lie some islands dotted here and there. Some of them have no houses upon them, but are planted with papyrus, and the stems of it grow so close that there is only just room for a man to stand between them; over the head of this thick jungle the leaves of the plant make a close covering. Robbers therefore can slip in there, make their plans, devise ambushes or lie hid, using the papyrus-plants as their fortifications. Others of the islands have cabins upon them, and present the appearance, the huts being closely packed together, of a town protected by water. These are the resorts of the buccaneers; one of them, larger than the others and with a greater number of cabins upon it, was called, I think, Nicochis; there, as their strongest fastness, they all collected, and took courage both from their numbers and the strength of the position. It was made a peninsula by a narrow causeway, a furlong in length and twelve fathoms broad, on either side of which the waters of the lake entirely surrounded the town. When they saw the general approaching they devised the following stratagem. They collected all their old men and provided them with branches of palm, to make them look like suppliants, while behind them they drew up the flower of their youth, armed with shield and spear; the veterans were to hold the branches aloft, so as to hide those in the rear behind the foliage, while the latter were to keep their spears horizontal and trail them along the ground, so that they might not be apparent.
 If the general were overcome by the old men’s prayers, the armed warriors were not to make any attempt to join battle; but if he were not, they were to invite him to enter their city, as if they were there to give themselves up to their fate; and when they arrived at the middle of the causeway, the old men, at a signal previously arranged, were to run away, throwing down the branches, while the men in arms were to charge past and fight their hardest. They were there then in their places, drawn up according to this plan, and implored the general to shew respect to their grey hairs and to the supplicatory palm-branches, and to have pity upon the town; they were ready, they said, to give him for his private purse a hundred talents of silver, and to send to the Satrap a hundred men willing to offer themselves as hostages for the city, so that he might be able to carry his superior some spoils of war. This offer of theirs was quite genuine, and if the general had chosen to accept their terms, they would have paid the money and given the hostages; but as he would not agree, “Very well,” said the old men, “if that is your decision we must accept what is fated for us. Only grant us one favour in our distress; do not kill us without our gates, or far from our town, but take us to the spot where our fathers lived, to the hearths where we were born, and letpalm, to make them look like suppliants, while behind them they drew up the flower of their youth, armed with shield and spear; the veterans were to hold the branches aloft, so as to hide those in the rear behind the foliage, while the latter were to keep their spears horizontal and trail them along the ground, so that they might not be apparent. If the general were overcome by the old men’s prayers, the armed warriors were not to make any attempt to join battle; but if he were not, they were to invite him to enter their city, as if they were there to give themselves up to their fate; and when they arrived at the middle of the causeway, the old men, at a signal previously arranged, were to run away, throwing down the branches, while the men in arms were to charge past and fight their hardest. They were there then in their places, drawn up according to this plan, and implored the general to shew respect to their grey hairs and to the supplicatory palm-branches, and to have pity upon the town; they were ready, they said, to give him for his private purse a hundred talents of silver, and to send to the Satrap a hundred men willing to offer themselves as hostages for the city, so that he might be able to carry his superior some spoils of war. This offer of theirs was quite genuine, and if the general had chosen to accept their terms, they would have paid the money and given the hostages; but as he would not agree, “Very well,” said the old men, “if that is your decision we must accept what is fated for us. Only grant us one favour in our distress; do not kill us without our gates, or far from our town, but take us to the spot where our fathers lived, to the hearths where we were born, and let our town be also our tomb.
 Look, we will lead the way for you to our death.” The general, hearing this request, released his troops from their battle formation, and bade them follow after him at leisure. There were some scouts who were watching the course of events from a distance; they had been posted by the buccaneers, who had ordered them, when they saw the enemy crossing, to break down the dykes and let all the water in upon them as they advanced. For this is the arrangement adopted with the waters of the Nile: at the mouth of every canal the Egyptians keep a dyke, so that the river should not overflow its banks and inundate the land before the time of need; when they wish to irrigate the soil, they open the dyke a little way, until it is turned into a swamp. There was in this way behind the town a long and wide canal from the river; and those appointed for the task, when they saw the entry of the hostile forces, quickly cut through the dyke. All happened in a moment; the old men in front suddenly disappeared, the others raised their spears and rushed forward, and the water flowed in at once; the lagoons rose, the water swelling on every side, the isthmus was flooded and the whole country became like a sea. The buccaneers fell on their enemies and transfixed with their spears those in front, including the general; for they were unarmed and quite disordered at the unexpected attack. As for the rest, the ways in which they met their death were too many to describe. Some at the first rush never even drew their weapons, but perished at once; others had no time in whichour town be also our tomb. Look, we will lead the way for you to our death.” The general, hearing this request, released his troops from their battle formation, and bade them follow after him at leisure. There were some scouts who were watching the course of events from a distance; they had been posted by the buccaneers, who had ordered them, when they saw the enemy crossing, to break down the dykes and let all the water in upon them as they advanced. For this is the arrangement adopted with the waters of the Nile: at the mouth of every canal the Egyptians keep a dyke, so that the river should not overflow its banks and inundate the land before the time of need; when they wish to irrigate the soil, they open the dyke a little way, until it is turned into a swamp. There was in this way behind the town a long and wide canal from the river; and those appointed for the task, when they saw the entry of the hostile forces, quickly cut through the dyke. All happened in a moment; the old men in front suddenly disappeared, the others raised their spears and rushed forward, and the water flowed in at once; the lagoons rose, the water swelling on every side, the isthmus was flooded and the whole country became like a sea. The buccaneers fell on their enemies and transfixed with their spears those in front, including the general; for they were unarmed and quite disordered at the unexpected attack. As for the rest, the ways in which they met their death were too many to describe. Some at the first rush never even drew their weapons, but perished at once; others had no time in which to make their defence; they were cut down in the same moment that they realised they were being attacked; others even before they realised it.
 Others, struck into immobility by the unexpected event, stood and waited for death. Some slipped directly they attempted to move, the water undermining their footsteps; others, as they attempted to flee, rolled into the deep part of the lake, and were dragged under. As for those who were standing on the firm ground, the water came up as far as their navels, and thereby turned up their shields, thus exposing their bodies to the blows of the enemy. The water in the lagoon was everywhere above the height of a man’s head; indeed, it was impossible to tell which was lake and which was land; those who attempted to run away upon land had to go slowly for fear of making a mistake, and so were quickly captured; while those who mistook their way into the lake, thinking it to be land, were drowned. It was a paradoxical kind of mishap, innumerable wrecks, but no ship. Both indeed were new and strange, a land-fight in the water and a shipwreck on land. The conquerors were greatly elated by the result, and in high conceit with themselves, imagining that they had gained their victory by their bravery, and not by an underhand stratagem; for the Egyptian is subject to the most slavish cowardice when he is afraid and the most fool-hardy rashness when encouraged by his position; in neither case has he any moderation—he either bows to fortune with over-great pusillanimity, or displays in success more than idiotic temerity. Ten days had now passed since the madness came upon Leucippe, and there was no improvementto make their defence; they were cut down in the same moment that they realised they were being attacked; others even before they realised it. Others, struck into immobility by the unexpected event, stood and waited for death. Some slipped directly they attempted to move, the water undermining their footsteps; others, as they attempted to flee, rolled into the deep part of the lake, and were dragged under. As for those who were standing on the firm ground, the water came up as far as their navels, and thereby turned up their shields, thus exposing their bodies to the blows of the enemy. The water in the lagoon was everywhere above the height of a man’s head; indeed, it was impossible to tell which was lake and which was land; those who attempted to run away upon land had to go slowly for fear of making a mistake, and so were quickly captured; while those who mistook their way into the lake, thinking it to be land, were drowned. It was a paradoxical kind of mishap, innumerable wrecks, but no ship. Both indeed were new and strange, a land-fight in the water and a shipwreck on land. The conquerors were greatly elated by the result, and in high conceit with themselves, imagining that they had gained their victory by their bravery, and not by an underhand stratagem; for the Egyptian is subject to the most slavish cowardice when he is afraid and the most fool-hardy rashness when encouraged by his position; in neither case has he any moderation—he either bows to fortune with over-great pusillanimity, or displays in success more than idiotic temerity. Ten days had now passed since the madness came upon Leucippe, and there was no improvement in her malady.
 On one occasion, however, while asleep, she uttered these words in her dream: “It is through you that I have lost my senses, Gorgias.” When morning came, I told Menelaus what she had said, and enquired if there were any Gorgias in the place. As we walked out, a young man came up to us and, addressing me, “I come,” he said, “to be the salvation of you and your beloved.” I was struck dumb at this and thought that he must be divinely sent to me. “You do not happen to be Gorgias, J suppose?” said I. “No,” said he, “but Chaereas. It is Gorgias that has been your undoing.” I could not but shiver at this, and said, “What is this undoing, and who is Gorgias? Some god communicated to me his name in the night; it is for you to be the interpreter of the heavenly message.” “Gorgias ” he said, “an Egyptian soldier: now he is no more, but has become the victim of the buccaneers. He fell in love with your chosen, and being naturally an expert in drugs, he prepared a love-philtre and bribed your Egyptian servant to take it and mix it in Leucippe’s drink: but the servant by a mistake administered the philtre undiluted, and it had the effect of producing madness. All this was told me yesterday by Gorgias’ servant, who was fighting by his side against the robbers; it seems that good fortune has kept him safe for you; he asks four pieces of gold to cure her, for he says that he possesses another preparation of drugsin her malady. On one occasion, however, while asleep, she uttered these words in her dream: “It is through you that I have lost my senses, Gorgias.” When morning came, I told Menelaus what she had said, and enquired if there were any Gorgias in the place. As we walked out, a young man came up to us and, addressing me, “I come,” he said, “to be the salvation of you and your beloved.” I was struck dumb at this and thought that he must be divinely sent to me. “You do not happen to be Gorgias, J suppose?” said I. “No,” said he, “but Chaereas. It is Gorgias that has been your undoing.” I could not but shiver at this, and said, “What is this undoing, and who is Gorgias? Some god communicated to me his name in the night; it is for you to be the interpreter of the heavenly message.” “Gorgias ” he said, “an Egyptian soldier: now he is no more, but has become the victim of the buccaneers. He fell in love with your chosen, and being naturally an expert in drugs, he prepared a love-philtre and bribed your Egyptian servant to take it and mix it in Leucippe’s drink: but the servant by a mistake administered the philtre undiluted, and it had the effect of producing madness. All this was told me yesterday by Gorgias’ servant, who was fighting by his side against the robbers; it seems that good fortune has kept him safe for you; he asks four pieces of gold to cure her, for he says that he possesses another preparation of drugs which is an antidote to the former.
 ” “May God bless you,” said I, “for this service you are rendering to us! Please bring hither the man of whom you speak.” He departed on this errand, while I went in to find my Egyptian, and I beat him about the face with my fist more than once or twice, shouting and saying to him, “Tell me, what did you give to Leucippe? What is it that has made her mad? “He was greatly frightened, and related to us the whole story just as Chaereas had told it to us; so we shut him up in prison and kept him there. Meanwhile Chaereas came back, bringing his man with him, and I addressed myself to both of them: “Here are your four pieces of gold as a reward for your good tidings; but listen to what I have to say about the remedy. You see how a drugged potion has been the cause of the girl’s present evil state; it cannot surely be without danger to add yet further drugs to organs already drugged. Tell us then of what ingredients it is composed, and make it up here in our presence; if you will do this, there will be a reward of four more gold pieces for you.” “Your fears are quite justified,” said he; “but the ingredients are quite common and all harmless to take; I will myself drink a portion equal to hers.” So saying, he sent someone out to buy them and bring them back, naming each; and when they had arrived, which was in no long time, he pounded them all up before our eyes and divided the compound into two parts. “I will myself drink the one first,” he said, “and the other I will give to the maiden. After she has taken it she will sleep the whole night through, andwhich is an antidote to the former.” “May God bless you,” said I, “for this service you are rendering to us! Please bring hither the man of whom you speak.” He departed on this errand, while I went in to find my Egyptian, and I beat him about the face with my fist more than once or twice, shouting and saying to him, “Tell me, what did you give to Leucippe? What is it that has made her mad? “He was greatly frightened, and related to us the whole story just as Chaereas had told it to us; so we shut him up in prison and kept him there. Meanwhile Chaereas came back, bringing his man with him, and I addressed myself to both of them: “Here are your four pieces of gold as a reward for your good tidings; but listen to what I have to say about the remedy. You see how a drugged potion has been the cause of the girl’s present evil state; it cannot surely be without danger to add yet further drugs to organs already drugged. Tell us then of what ingredients it is composed, and make it up here in our presence; if you will do this, there will be a reward of four more gold pieces for you.” “Your fears are quite justified,” said he; “but the ingredients are quite common and all harmless to take; I will myself drink a portion equal to hers.” So saying, he sent someone out to buy them and bring them back, naming each; and when they had arrived, which was in no long time, he pounded them all up before our eyes and divided the compound into two parts. “I will myself drink the one first,” he said, “and the other I will give to the maiden. After she has taken it she will sleep the whole night through, and when morning comes she will arise at once from her sleep and from the disease.
 ” So he first took his portion of the drug, and bade the rest be given her to drink in the evening. “But I,” he added, “must go away and rest, as the drug requires.’’ With these words he departed, taking the four gold pieces 1 had given him. “I will give you the other four,” I said, “on her recovery.” So when the time came to give her the medicine, I poured it out and prayed over it thus: “Drug, child of earth, gift of Aesculapius, bring true thy promises; be more fortunate than I and save me my dearest. Overcome that other cruel and savage philtre,” When I had thus conjured the medicine I kissed the cup, and gave it to Leucippe to drink; and she, as the man had predicted, soon lay fast asleep. I sat by her, and addressed her as though she could hear my words; “Will you really regain your senses once more? Will you know me again? Shall I hear again that dear voice of yours? Give me some token of hope, now, in your sleep, just as yesterday you rightly divined the name of Gorgias. Happier are you while at rest; when awake, you suffer the misfortune of madness, while your dreams have sound sense.” Thus did I harangue Leucippe, as though she could hear me, and at last appeared the dawn for which I had prayed so long; Leucippe spoke, and the word she uttered was “Clitophon.” I jumped up, went to her, and asked her how shewhen morning comes she will arise at once from her sleep and from the disease.” So he first took his portion of the drug, and bade the rest be given her to drink in the evening. “But I,” he added, “must go away and rest, as the drug requires.’’ With these words he departed, taking the four gold pieces 1 had given him. “I will give you the other four,” I said, “on her recovery.” So when the time came to give her the medicine, I poured it out and prayed over it thus: “Drug, child of earth, gift of Aesculapius, bring true thy promises; be more fortunate than I and save me my dearest. Overcome that other cruel and savage philtre,” When I had thus conjured the medicine I kissed the cup, and gave it to Leucippe to drink; and she, as the man had predicted, soon lay fast asleep. I sat by her, and addressed her as though she could hear my words; “Will you really regain your senses once more? Will you know me again? Shall I hear again that dear voice of yours? Give me some token of hope, now, in your sleep, just as yesterday you rightly divined the name of Gorgias. Happier are you while at rest; when awake, you suffer the misfortune of madness, while your dreams have sound sense.” Thus did I harangue Leucippe, as though she could hear me, and at last appeared the dawn for which I had prayed so long; Leucippe spoke, and the word she uttered was “Clitophon.” I jumped up, went to her, and asked her how she was; she seemed to know nothing of what had happened, but was astonished to see her bonds, and asked who had fettered her.
 Seeing her in her senses again, I was overjoyed to confusion and undid the bonds, and then related to her the whole course of events; she was quite ashamed when she heard it; she blushed, and could hardly be persuaded that she was not still beside herself. I therefore did my best to comfort and calm her, and paid the fee for the drug with the utmost good will. All the money which we had provided for our journey was safe; that which Satyrus had happened to tie up in his girdle when we were shipwrecked had not been taken from him by the robbers, and neither he nor Menelaus had lost any of their possessions. While all this was going on there came from the capital against the robbers a larger force, which settled their business and razed their town to the ground. The river freed from the buccaneers’ violence, we proposed to sail to Alexandria, and Chaereas was to accompany us; for he had become on friendly terms with us on account of the information he had been able to give us about the philtre. He was of the Island of Pharos by birth and a fisherman by trade; he had served in the fleet sent against the buccaneers, and had taken his discharge after the conclusion of the war. Long had boats been absent from the Nile, but the river was now thronged with passengers, and the whole presented a delightful spectacle—the singing of the boatmen, the rhythm of the oars, and the procession of the boats; it was like a great fair, and the whole of our voyage seemed to be onwas; she seemed to know nothing of what had happened, but was astonished to see her bonds, and asked who had fettered her. Seeing her in her senses again, I was overjoyed to confusion and undid the bonds, and then related to her the whole course of events; she was quite ashamed when she heard it; she blushed, and could hardly be persuaded that she was not still beside herself. I therefore did my best to comfort and calm her, and paid the fee for the drug with the utmost good will. All the money which we had provided for our journey was safe; that which Satyrus had happened to tie up in his girdle when we were shipwrecked had not been taken from him by the robbers, and neither he nor Menelaus had lost any of their possessions. While all this was going on there came from the capital against the robbers a larger force, which settled their business and razed their town to the ground. The river freed from the buccaneers’ violence, we proposed to sail to Alexandria, and Chaereas was to accompany us; for he had become on friendly terms with us on account of the information he had been able to give us about the philtre. He was of the Island of Pharos by birth and a fisherman by trade; he had served in the fleet sent against the buccaneers, and had taken his discharge after the conclusion of the war. Long had boats been absent from the Nile, but the river was now thronged with passengers, and the whole presented a delightful spectacle—the singing of the boatmen, the rhythm of the oars, and the procession of the boats; it was like a great fair, and the whole of our voyage seemed to be on a river keeping festival.
 That was the first occasion on which I drank the water of the Nile without mixing it with wine, as 1 wished to test its excellence as a drink; wine spoils its character. I filled a transparent glass with it, and saw that in the matter of limpidity it vied with, nay, it defeated the vessel that contained it; to the taste it was sweet and cool enough to be delightful, whereas some of the Greek rivers with which I compared it are so cold as to be painful. For this reason the Egyptian does not feel the need of the juice of Bacchus, and fears not to drink the water without mixture. I was also surprised at the manner in which they drink it: they do not draw it in the usual way, nor use vessels to drink it from, having a vessel provided by nature—their hand. If one of them, while on ship-board, is thirsty, he leans his face forward over the side above the river, and then, making a hollow of his hand, plunging it beneath the surface, and filling it with water, he jerks it up into his mouth and does not miss the mark; his open mouth awaits, receives and keeps it when it is thrown, and then shuts, not allowing it to fall out again. I also saw another beast, a denizen of the Nile, which is even more celebrated for its strength than the hippopotamus: it is called the crocodile. Its form partakes both of that of a beast and that of a fish; it is of great length from head to tail, though it is not proportionately broad. Its hide is wrinkled anda river keeping festival. That was the first occasion on which I drank the water of the Nile without mixing it with wine, as 1 wished to test its excellence as a drink; wine spoils its character. I filled a transparent glass with it, and saw that in the matter of limpidity it vied with, nay, it defeated the vessel that contained it; to the taste it was sweet and cool enough to be delightful, whereas some of the Greek rivers with which I compared it are so cold as to be painful. For this reason the Egyptian does not feel the need of the juice of Bacchus, and fears not to drink the water without mixture. I was also surprised at the manner in which they drink it: they do not draw it in the usual way, nor use vessels to drink it from, having a vessel provided by nature—their hand. If one of them, while on ship-board, is thirsty, he leans his face forward over the side above the river, and then, making a hollow of his hand, plunging it beneath the surface, and filling it with water, he jerks it up into his mouth and does not miss the mark; his open mouth awaits, receives and keeps it when it is thrown, and then shuts, not allowing it to fall out again. I also saw another beast, a denizen of the Nile, which is even more celebrated for its strength than the hippopotamus: it is called the crocodile. Its form partakes both of that of a beast and that of a fish; it is of great length from head to tail, though it is not proportionately broad. Its hide is wrinkled and scaly, the skin of its back black and hard as stones, whereas that of its belly is white; it has four feet, with curved, bandy legs, like those of a tortoise; its tail is long and thick, like the solid part of its body; unlike that of other animals, it is the bony continuation of the spine, of which it is indeed an integral part.
 On the upper side it is divided into cruel spines, like the teeth of a saw; the animal uses it like a scourge against its prey, striking with it anything against which it is struggling, and inflicting several wounds with a single blow. Its head grows directly on to its shoulders, forming with them a single straight line; for a neck is not one of the gifts with which it has been favoured by nature. Its eyes are more grim and staring than those of a horse; it is generally in the condition of having its mouth wide open. For the rest of the time, when not agape, that part of the beast is a head; but when it yawns after its prey, it is all mouth. It lifts its upper jaw, keeping the lower one rigid. So wide apart do they go that the opening reaches all the way to the shoulders and the entrance to its belly is visible. Its teeth are numerous, placed one behind the other; they are said to be identical in number with the days God gives light to for a year—a mighty crop to spring up in the field of its jaws! When it comes up from the river on to the land, you would be surprised at the creature’s enormous strength if you observed the way it drags its body.scaly, the skin of its back black and hard as stones, whereas that of its belly is white; it has four feet, with curved, bandy legs, like those of a tortoise; its tail is long and thick, like the solid part of its body; unlike that of other animals, it is the bony continuation of the spine, of which it is indeed an integral part. On the upper side it is divided into cruel spines, like the teeth of a saw; the animal uses it like a scourge against its prey, striking with it anything against which it is struggling, and inflicting several wounds with a single blow. Its head grows directly on to its shoulders, forming with them a single straight line; for a neck is not one of the gifts with which it has been favoured by nature. Its eyes are more grim and staring than those of a horse; it is generally in the condition of having its mouth wide open. For the rest of the time, when not agape, that part of the beast is a head; but when it yawns after its prey, it is all mouth. It lifts its upper jaw, keeping the lower one rigid. So wide apart do they go that the opening reaches all the way to the shoulders and the entrance to its belly is visible. Its teeth are numerous, placed one behind the other; they are said to be identical in number with the days God gives light to for a year—a mighty crop to spring up in the field of its jaws! When it comes up from the river on to the land, you would be surprised at the creature’s enormous strength if you observed the way it drags its body.
 After a voyage lasting for three days, we arrived at Alexandria. I entered it by the Sun Gate, as it is called, and was instantly struck by the splendid beauty of the city, which filled my eyes with delight. From the Sun Gate to the Moon Gate—these are the guardian divinities of the entrances—led a straight double row of columns, about the middle of which lies the open part of the town, and in it so many streets that walking in them you would fancy yourself abroad while still at home. Going a few hundred yards further, I came to the quarter called after Alexander, where I saw a second town; the splendour of this was cut into squares, for there was a row of columns intersected by another as long at right angles. I tried to cast my eyes down every street, but my gaze was still unsatisfied, and I could not grasp all the beauty of the spot at once; some parts I saw, some I was on the point of seeing, some I earnestly desired to see, some I could not pass by; that which I actually saw kept my gaze fixed, while that which I expected to see would drag it on to the next. I explored therefore every street, and at last, my vision unsatisfied, exclaimed in weariness, “Ah, my eyes, we are beaten.” Two things struck me as especially strange and extraordinary—it was impossible to decide which was the greatest, the size of the place or its beauty, the city itself or its inhabitants; for the former was larger than a continent, the latter outnumbered a whole nation.
 Looking at the city, I doubted whether any race of men could ever fill it; looking at the inhabitants, I wondered whether any city could ever be found large enough to hold them all. The balance seemed exactly even. It so fortuned that it was at that time the sacred festival of the great god whom the Greeks call Zeus, the Egyptians Serapis, and there was a procession of torches. It was the greatest spectacle I ever beheld, for it was late evening and the sun had gone down; but there was no sign of night—it was as though another sun had arisen, but distributed into small parts in every direction; I thought that on that occasion the city vied with the sky for beauty. I also visited the Gracious Zeus and his temple in his aspect as god of Heaven; and then praying to the great god and humbly imploring him that our troubles might be at last at an end, we came back to the lodgings which Menelaus had hired for us. But the god, it seems, was not prepared to assent to our prayers, but still another of the trials and exercises of Fate was in store for us. This was the cause of it. Chaereas had for some time been secretly in love with Leucippe; that was the reason that he had informed us about the drug which had been administered to her; he was seeking an opportunity of beginning a close acquaintance with her, and desired to save her to his own advantage. Knowing that it was impossible otherwise to succeed in his desires, he contrived a plot. Being himself a sea-faring man, he got together a pirate-band of fellows of his own sort; and, after instructing them how they were to act, asked us tothe former was larger than a continent, the latter outnumbered a whole nation. Looking at the city, I doubted whether any race of men could ever fill it; looking at the inhabitants, I wondered whether any city could ever be found large enough to hold them all. The balance seemed exactly even. It so fortuned that it was at that time the sacred festival of the great god whom the Greeks call Zeus, the Egyptians Serapis, and there was a procession of torches. It was the greatest spectacle I ever beheld, for it was late evening and the sun had gone down; but there was no sign of night—it was as though another sun had arisen, but distributed into small parts in every direction; I thought that on that occasion the city vied with the sky for beauty. I also visited the Gracious Zeus and his temple in his aspect as god of Heaven; and then praying to the great god and humbly imploring him that our troubles might be at last at an end, we came back to the lodgings which Menelaus had hired for us. But the god, it seems, was not prepared to assent to our prayers, but still another of the trials and exercises of Fate was in store for us. This was the cause of it. Chaereas had for some time been secretly in love with Leucippe; that was the reason that he had informed us about the drug which had been administered to her; he was seeking an opportunity of beginning a close acquaintance with her, and desired to save her to his own advantage. Knowing that it was impossible otherwise to succeed in his desires, he contrived a plot. Being himself a sea-faring man, he got together a pirate-band of fellows of his own sort; and, after instructing them how they were to act, asked us to dinner at Pharos, professing that it was his birthday.
 We were but just leaving our door when an evil omen happened to us; a hawk chasing a swallow struck Leucippe’s head with his wing. At this I was somewhat disturbed, and, looking up to heaven, “What is this portent,” said I, “Ο Zeus, that thou displayest to us? If in very deed this bird comes from thee, show us some other clearer augury.” Turning round (I happened to be standing by a painter’s studio) I saw a picture hanging there, the subject of which had a similar hidden significance, representing the rape of Philomela, the violence employed by Tereus, and the cutting out of her tongue. The whole story was fully represented in the picture, including the tapestry, Tereus himself, and the fatal table. A serving-maid was standing and holding up the tapestry unfolded; Philomela stood near with her finger on it, pointing out the subjects of the embroideries; Procne was bowing her head to show that she understood what was being pointed out to her; there was a savage look in her eyes and she had become furious at what she saw depicted there. The subject embroidered on it was the Thracian Tereus struggling with Philomela in a lustful strife; her hair was dishevelled, her girdle undone, her tunic torn, and her bosom half naked; with her right hand she aimed for Tereus’ eyes, whiledinner at Pharos, professing that it was his birthday. We were but just leaving our door when an evil omen happened to us; a hawk chasing a swallow struck Leucippe’s head with his wing. At this I was somewhat disturbed, and, looking up to heaven, “What is this portent,” said I, “Ο Zeus, that thou displayest to us? If in very deed this bird comes from thee, show us some other clearer augury.” Turning round (I happened to be standing by a painter’s studio) I saw a picture hanging there, the subject of which had a similar hidden significance, representing the rape of Philomela, the violence employed by Tereus, and the cutting out of her tongue. The whole story was fully represented in the picture, including the tapestry, Tereus himself, and the fatal table. A serving-maid was standing and holding up the tapestry unfolded; Philomela stood near with her finger on it, pointing out the subjects of the embroideries; Procne was bowing her head to show that she understood what was being pointed out to her; there was a savage look in her eyes and she had become furious at what she saw depicted there. The subject embroidered on it was the Thracian Tereus struggling with Philomela in a lustful strife; her hair was dishevelled, her girdle undone, her tunic torn, and her bosom half naked; with her right hand she aimed for Tereus’ eyes, while with her left she tried to draw her torn garments over her breasts.
 He held her in his arms, drawing her form towards him within them, and tightening his embrace round her, body to body; such was the picture of the tapestry which the painter had made. As for the rest of the painting, the women were shewing Tereus the remains of the feast in a basket, the child’s head and hands; their expression was a mixture of laughter and fear. Tereus was depicted leaping up from his seat and drawing his sword against the women; his leg was pressing against the table, which neither stood nor fell, but displayed the unstable balance of an impending fall. “In my opinion,” said Menelaus, “we should not continue our journey to Pharos; for you may observe that we have had two bad signs, the touching of us by the bird’s wing and the threat which this picture implies. Those who profess to interpret signs bid us pay attention to the stories of pictures, if such happen to meet our eye as we set forth to our business, and to conclude that what is likely to happen to us will be of the same character as the event of the painted story. You see then how full of miseries is this drawing—unlawful love, shameless adultery, women’s woes; I therefore recommend you to desist from this expedition of yours.” His words seemed to me not without reason, and I prayed Chaereas to have us excused for that day; he left us in considerable displeasure, saying that he would return to us on the morrow. Said Leucippe to me—all womankind is fond of stories—” What is the meaning of the subject of thiswith her left she tried to draw her torn garments over her breasts. He held her in his arms, drawing her form towards him within them, and tightening his embrace round her, body to body; such was the picture of the tapestry which the painter had made. As for the rest of the painting, the women were shewing Tereus the remains of the feast in a basket, the child’s head and hands; their expression was a mixture of laughter and fear. Tereus was depicted leaping up from his seat and drawing his sword against the women; his leg was pressing against the table, which neither stood nor fell, but displayed the unstable balance of an impending fall. “In my opinion,” said Menelaus, “we should not continue our journey to Pharos; for you may observe that we have had two bad signs, the touching of us by the bird’s wing and the threat which this picture implies. Those who profess to interpret signs bid us pay attention to the stories of pictures, if such happen to meet our eye as we set forth to our business, and to conclude that what is likely to happen to us will be of the same character as the event of the painted story. You see then how full of miseries is this drawing—unlawful love, shameless adultery, women’s woes; I therefore recommend you to desist from this expedition of yours.” His words seemed to me not without reason, and I prayed Chaereas to have us excused for that day; he left us in considerable displeasure, saying that he would return to us on the morrow. Said Leucippe to me—all womankind is fond of stories—” What is the meaning of the subject of this picture? What are these birds? Who are those women and that vile man? “I began to relate to her the whole history: “They are the nightingale,” said I, “the swallow, and the hoopoe—all human creatures, and all birds as well; the man became the hoopoe, Philomela the swallow, and Procne the nightingale.
 Both these women had their home in Athens, and the man, Tereus, was Procne’s husband. One wife at a time, it seems, is not enough for a barbarian’s love, especially if opportunity occur for him to give rein to his wantonness; and this Thracian’s opportunity came through the natural affection of Procne, who sent her husband to bring her sister to her. He started on his journey still the husband of Procne, but he came back the lover of Philomela, and by the way he made her a second Procne; then, fearing Philomela’s tongue, his bridegroom’s present to her was that she should be dumb, and he shore away the glory of her speech. But this profited him nothing; Philomela’s art provided her with a silent voice. She weaves a tell-tale tapestry, working her story into the threads; her hand takes the place of her tongue and sets out for Procne’s eyes what Procne should have learned by her ears—she tells her sister of her sufferings by means ofpicture? What are these birds? Who are those women and that vile man? “I began to relate to her the whole history: “They are the nightingale,” said I, “the swallow, and the hoopoe—all human creatures, and all birds as well; the man became the hoopoe, Philomela the swallow, and Procne the nightingale. Both these women had their home in Athens, and the man, Tereus, was Procne’s husband. One wife at a time, it seems, is not enough for a barbarian’s love, especially if opportunity occur for him to give rein to his wantonness; and this Thracian’s opportunity came through the natural affection of Procne, who sent her husband to bring her sister to her. He started on his journey still the husband of Procne, but he came back the lover of Philomela, and by the way he made her a second Procne; then, fearing Philomela’s tongue, his bridegroom’s present to her was that she should be dumb, and he shore away the glory of her speech. But this profited him nothing; Philomela’s art provided her with a silent voice. She weaves a tell-tale tapestry, working her story into the threads; her hand takes the place of her tongue and sets out for Procne’s eyes what Procne should have learned by her ears—she tells her sister of her sufferings by means of her shuttle.
 When Procne read of the deed of violence by means of the tapestry, she sought how she might take an overwhelming vengeance upon her husband. With two women, double was their wrath; they conspired together for one object, spurred on by jealousy and sense of violence done, and contrived a banquet even more hideous than the unhallowed nuptials; Tereus’ own child was to be his dish, whose mother had been Procne before her fury; but now she had forgotten the pangs by which she gave him birth. So far greater were the agonies of jealousy than those of the womb; women care for nothing but to avenge themselves on him who has wronged their bed, even if they suffer in their revenge a woe equal to that which they inflict, and they balance the pain of what they suffer by the sweetness of the vengeance which they exact. So Tereus dined on this devils’ dish, while they carried to him in a basket the remains of his son with a mixture of fear and mocking laughter; he sees those remains, mourns for what he has eaten—he knew that he was the father of the very food he had swallowed; knowing it, he draws his sword and rushes upon the women, but the air receives them from his vengeance; he mounts with them, and like them becomes a bird. They still preserve the image of the passions they feel—the swallow flies, Tereus pursues; his hate is as great as ever, even when they are all clothed with wings.” For the moment then we had by this incident escaped the plot laid against us; but we only gained one day. On the morrow came Chaereas at dawn:her shuttle. When Procne read of the deed of violence by means of the tapestry, she sought how she might take an overwhelming vengeance upon her husband. With two women, double was their wrath; they conspired together for one object, spurred on by jealousy and sense of violence done, and contrived a banquet even more hideous than the unhallowed nuptials; Tereus’ own child was to be his dish, whose mother had been Procne before her fury; but now she had forgotten the pangs by which she gave him birth. So far greater were the agonies of jealousy than those of the womb; women care for nothing but to avenge themselves on him who has wronged their bed, even if they suffer in their revenge a woe equal to that which they inflict, and they balance the pain of what they suffer by the sweetness of the vengeance which they exact. So Tereus dined on this devils’ dish, while they carried to him in a basket the remains of his son with a mixture of fear and mocking laughter; he sees those remains, mourns for what he has eaten—he knew that he was the father of the very food he had swallowed; knowing it, he draws his sword and rushes upon the women, but the air receives them from his vengeance; he mounts with them, and like them becomes a bird. They still preserve the image of the passions they feel—the swallow flies, Tereus pursues; his hate is as great as ever, even when they are all clothed with wings.” For the moment then we had by this incident escaped the plot laid against us; but we only gained one day. On the morrow came Chaereas at dawn: for very shame we could make no further excuses and got aboard a boat to go to Pharos; Menelaus stayed behind, saying that he was not well.
 Chaereas first took us to the light-house and shewed us the most remarkable and extraordinary structure upon which it rested; it was like a mountain, almost reaching the clouds, in the middle of the sea. Below the building flowed the waters; it seemed to be as it were suspended above their surface, while at the top of this mountain rose a second sun to be a guide for ships. After this he took us to his house, which was on the shore at the extremity of the island. As soon as evening was come, Chaereas went out, alleging as a pretence the demands of nature. Not long after there was a sudden tumult at the door, and in rushed a large number of tall men, their swords drawn, all directing themselves upon the maiden. Seeing my dearest being taken from me, I could not bear it, and rushed into the fray; one of them wounded me with his sword in the thigh, and I sank to the ground. While I was thus falling, streaming with blood, they put her aboard a boat and made off. Such was the noise and tumult caused by the pirates that the commander of the island came up, who happened to be an acquaintance of mine because he had been in our former camp. I shewed him my wound and implored him to pursue the pirates. There were plenty of ships anchored there about the town; the commander entered one of them andfor very shame we could make no further excuses and got aboard a boat to go to Pharos; Menelaus stayed behind, saying that he was not well. Chaereas first took us to the light-house and shewed us the most remarkable and extraordinary structure upon which it rested; it was like a mountain, almost reaching the clouds, in the middle of the sea. Below the building flowed the waters; it seemed to be as it were suspended above their surface, while at the top of this mountain rose a second sun to be a guide for ships. After this he took us to his house, which was on the shore at the extremity of the island. As soon as evening was come, Chaereas went out, alleging as a pretence the demands of nature. Not long after there was a sudden tumult at the door, and in rushed a large number of tall men, their swords drawn, all directing themselves upon the maiden. Seeing my dearest being taken from me, I could not bear it, and rushed into the fray; one of them wounded me with his sword in the thigh, and I sank to the ground. While I was thus falling, streaming with blood, they put her aboard a boat and made off. Such was the noise and tumult caused by the pirates that the commander of the island came up, who happened to be an acquaintance of mine because he had been in our former camp. I shewed him my wound and implored him to pursue the pirates. There were plenty of ships anchored there about the town; the commander entered one of them and went in chase, his bodyguard with him, while I followed them, carried aboard in a litter.
 Directly the pirates saw our ship putting out to give them battle, they brought the maiden up on deck with her hands tied behind her; and one of them cried out with a tremendous voice, “Here is the prize for which you are contending,” cut off her head, and threw the body down into the sea. When I saw this, I cried out and wept, and would have cast myself in too; restrained from doing so by my companions, I begged them to stop the ship, and that somebody might be sent down into the water to see if I could rescue the maiden’s body with a view to its burial. The commander agreed, and stopped the ship; two of the sailors jumped overboard, got hold of the trunk and, brought it back to us. Meanwhile the pirates rowed with still greater vigour; we were again nearing them when they sighted another ship, and, on recognising it, called to it for help; its crew were purple-fishers, also pirates. When the commander saw that there were now two ships against him, he became disquieted and ordered the rowers to reverse; the pirates indeed had already desisted from their flight and were challenging us to give battle. We reached the land; I disembarked, and there, embracing the body, I gave vent to my tears: “Now,” I cried, “now, Leucippe, are you really dead; and a double death, with its share both in land and sea. The poor remains of your body I possess, but you I have lost; the division between land and sea is no fair one; though there seems to be left to me the greater part of you, it is really the less, while that which seems to possess but a smallwent in chase, his bodyguard with him, while I followed them, carried aboard in a litter. Directly the pirates saw our ship putting out to give them battle, they brought the maiden up on deck with her hands tied behind her; and one of them cried out with a tremendous voice, “Here is the prize for which you are contending,” cut off her head, and threw the body down into the sea. When I saw this, I cried out and wept, and would have cast myself in too; restrained from doing so by my companions, I begged them to stop the ship, and that somebody might be sent down into the water to see if I could rescue the maiden’s body with a view to its burial. The commander agreed, and stopped the ship; two of the sailors jumped overboard, got hold of the trunk and, brought it back to us. Meanwhile the pirates rowed with still greater vigour; we were again nearing them when they sighted another ship, and, on recognising it, called to it for help; its crew were purple-fishers, also pirates. When the commander saw that there were now two ships against him, he became disquieted and ordered the rowers to reverse; the pirates indeed had already desisted from their flight and were challenging us to give battle. We reached the land; I disembarked, and there, embracing the body, I gave vent to my tears: “Now,” I cried, “now, Leucippe, are you really dead; and a double death, with its share both in land and sea. The poor remains of your body I possess, but you I have lost; the division between land and sea is no fair one; though there seems to be left to me the greater part of you, it is really the less, while that which seems to possess but a small part of you has really all.
 Come, since Fate has grudged me kisses on your face, I will kiss instead your wounded neck.” After this dirge, and after burying the body, I returned again to Alexandria; there my wound was tended, though against my will, Menelaus exhorting and comforting me, and I endured to live. Six months had now passed, and the intensity of my anguish began a little to fade: for time is the medicine of grief, healing the wounds of the soul—the light of the sun brings with it joy, and grief, however overwhelming it be, boils only while the soul is aflame, and cools when it is finally overcome by the influence of lapse of time. I was walking in the market-place when somebody behind me suddenly took hold of my hand and swung me round, and, without a word, seized me in his arms and kissed me warmly. At first I did not know who it was, but stood like one struck dumb, receiving his embraces—a mere target for kisses; but in a moment or so, when I saw his face, and it was Clinias, I shouted aloud for joy, and embraced him in return and gave him back the same endearments. After this we both went back to my lodgings, where he related to me his story, how he had escaped from the shipwreck, while I told him all that had come to pass in the matter of Leucippe. “Immediately,” said he, “after the break-up of the ship, I climbed on to the yard; I obtained a hold of it with some difficulty, as it was already crowded, but I put my hands round it and tried to hang from it and keep it within my clutch. We hadpart of you has really all. Come, since Fate has grudged me kisses on your face, I will kiss instead your wounded neck.” After this dirge, and after burying the body, I returned again to Alexandria; there my wound was tended, though against my will, Menelaus exhorting and comforting me, and I endured to live. Six months had now passed, and the intensity of my anguish began a little to fade: for time is the medicine of grief, healing the wounds of the soul—the light of the sun brings with it joy, and grief, however overwhelming it be, boils only while the soul is aflame, and cools when it is finally overcome by the influence of lapse of time. I was walking in the market-place when somebody behind me suddenly took hold of my hand and swung me round, and, without a word, seized me in his arms and kissed me warmly. At first I did not know who it was, but stood like one struck dumb, receiving his embraces—a mere target for kisses; but in a moment or so, when I saw his face, and it was Clinias, I shouted aloud for joy, and embraced him in return and gave him back the same endearments. After this we both went back to my lodgings, where he related to me his story, how he had escaped from the shipwreck, while I told him all that had come to pass in the matter of Leucippe. “Immediately,” said he, “after the break-up of the ship, I climbed on to the yard; I obtained a hold of it with some difficulty, as it was already crowded, but I put my hands round it and tried to hang from it and keep it within my clutch. We had not long drifted upon it, when a mighty billow lifted the spar on high and dashed it, almost in a perpendicular position, upon a rock beneath the surface of the water, the impact being at the opposite end of it to that upon which I was hanging.
 After it actually struck, it sprang back again violently like a catapult, and shot me from it as though I had been flung from a sling. After that I swam for the rest of the day, though I no longer cherished any hope of being saved. I was already worn out and had given myself up to fate, when I saw a ship bearing towards me from straight in front; and so, lifting up my hands as well as I could, I entreated and prayed for their pity by gestures. They, either taking compassion upon me or because the wind so impelled them, came quite close by me, and one of the sailors flung me a rope without the vessel pausing in her course; I caught hold of it and so they dragged me up from the very gates of death. The vessel was bound for Sidon, and some of those who were on board knew who I was and looked after me. “After a voyage of two days we arrived at that city, and I asked the Sidonians on board (Xenodamas the merchant, and Theophilus his father-in-law) not to mention to any Tyrian that they might meet how I had escaped from the shipwreck, so that it might not be known that I had fled from the country with you. I hoped, that if they kept quiet on these matters, my absence might escape notice; there were only five days while I had been away and not been seen about, and, as you know, I had instructed those of my household to tell anybody that came makingnot long drifted upon it, when a mighty billow lifted the spar on high and dashed it, almost in a perpendicular position, upon a rock beneath the surface of the water, the impact being at the opposite end of it to that upon which I was hanging. After it actually struck, it sprang back again violently like a catapult, and shot me from it as though I had been flung from a sling. After that I swam for the rest of the day, though I no longer cherished any hope of being saved. I was already worn out and had given myself up to fate, when I saw a ship bearing towards me from straight in front; and so, lifting up my hands as well as I could, I entreated and prayed for their pity by gestures. They, either taking compassion upon me or because the wind so impelled them, came quite close by me, and one of the sailors flung me a rope without the vessel pausing in her course; I caught hold of it and so they dragged me up from the very gates of death. The vessel was bound for Sidon, and some of those who were on board knew who I was and looked after me. “After a voyage of two days we arrived at that city, and I asked the Sidonians on board (Xenodamas the merchant, and Theophilus his father-in-law) not to mention to any Tyrian that they might meet how I had escaped from the shipwreck, so that it might not be known that I had fled from the country with you. I hoped, that if they kept quiet on these matters, my absence might escape notice; there were only five days while I had been away and not been seen about, and, as you know, I had instructed those of my household to tell anybody that came making inquiries that I had gone away to my country seat for ten full days; and I found that, as a fact, this report about me held the field.
 Your father did not return from his absence in Palestine until two days later; and he then found a letter had arrived from Leucippe’s father —it had come the very day after our flight—betrothing his daughter to you. He was doubly distressed when he read the letter and heard of your flight; first, because of the loss of the prize which the letter brought, and second, because Fortune had arranged that you should suffer by so narrow a margin; none of all these misfortunes would have happened if the letter had come a little sooner. He decided that he had better not write to his brother an account of what had happened, and he also asked the girl’s mother to keep silence for the present; ‘We shall probably soon find them,’ he said, ‘and there is no necessity for Sostratus to know the misfortune that has befallen us. Wherever they are, they will be only too glad to come back when they hear of the betrothal, as they may thus openly attain the very object of their flight.’ He did his very utmost to find out where you had gone; and just a few days ago there came one, Diophantus of Tyre, who had lately come by sea from Egypt, and told him that he had seen you there. When I learned how things were, I instantly took ship hither, and this is now the eighthinquiries that I had gone away to my country seat for ten full days; and I found that, as a fact, this report about me held the field. Your father did not return from his absence in Palestine until two days later; and he then found a letter had arrived from Leucippe’s father —it had come the very day after our flight—betrothing his daughter to you. He was doubly distressed when he read the letter and heard of your flight; first, because of the loss of the prize which the letter brought, and second, because Fortune had arranged that you should suffer by so narrow a margin; none of all these misfortunes would have happened if the letter had come a little sooner. He decided that he had better not write to his brother an account of what had happened, and he also asked the girl’s mother to keep silence for the present; ‘We shall probably soon find them,’ he said, ‘and there is no necessity for Sostratus to know the misfortune that has befallen us. Wherever they are, they will be only too glad to come back when they hear of the betrothal, as they may thus openly attain the very object of their flight.’ He did his very utmost to find out where you had gone; and just a few days ago there came one, Diophantus of Tyre, who had lately come by sea from Egypt, and told him that he had seen you there. When I learned how things were, I instantly took ship hither, and this is now the eighth day that I have been scouring the city in search of you.
 You have to make up your mind as to your future plans, as your father will probably be here.” Hearing this story, I cried aloud at the prank that Fortune had played me: “Cruel goddess,” I said, “this is the time that Sostratus chooses to give me Leucippe—an espousal coming from the field of war—so exactly measuring his time that his message should not arrive before our flight. Alas for my untimely good luck! How happy could I have been with one day’s difference! After death comes a wedding, after the dirge the marriage-hymn. What sort of a bride is this that Fate gives me? Why, she has not even given her to me in the shape of a whole corpse.” “This is not the time,” said Clinias, “for lamentations; but let us consider whether it would be best for you to return at once to your own country or to wait for your father here.” “Neither,” said I: “with what sort of countenance could I meet my father, after first fleeing from him in an underhand manner, and then being the destruction of the charge entrusted to him by his brother? There is nothing that I can do except to make my escape before he arrives.” While I was thus speaking, in came Menelaus and Satyrus with him; after embracing Clinias they heard the whole story from us. “You have the chance,” said Satyrus, “of putting your fortunes in a fine position and at the same time of shewing pity to a soul that is all afire for your sake. Let Clinias hear the state of affairs as well; Aphrodite offers this fellow a real prize, and he will not stretch out his hand to take it. She has made today that I have been scouring the city in search of you. You have to make up your mind as to your future plans, as your father will probably be here.” Hearing this story, I cried aloud at the prank that Fortune had played me: “Cruel goddess,” I said, “this is the time that Sostratus chooses to give me Leucippe—an espousal coming from the field of war—so exactly measuring his time that his message should not arrive before our flight. Alas for my untimely good luck! How happy could I have been with one day’s difference! After death comes a wedding, after the dirge the marriage-hymn. What sort of a bride is this that Fate gives me? Why, she has not even given her to me in the shape of a whole corpse.” “This is not the time,” said Clinias, “for lamentations; but let us consider whether it would be best for you to return at once to your own country or to wait for your father here.” “Neither,” said I: “with what sort of countenance could I meet my father, after first fleeing from him in an underhand manner, and then being the destruction of the charge entrusted to him by his brother? There is nothing that I can do except to make my escape before he arrives.” While I was thus speaking, in came Menelaus and Satyrus with him; after embracing Clinias they heard the whole story from us. “You have the chance,” said Satyrus, “of putting your fortunes in a fine position and at the same time of shewing pity to a soul that is all afire for your sake. Let Clinias hear the state of affairs as well; Aphrodite offers this fellow a real prize, and he will not stretch out his hand to take it. She has made to dote on him a woman so beautiful that you might take her for a lovely statue; she is an Ephesian by race, her name is Melite; she is very rich, and young.
 Her husband has lately been lost at sea, and now she is willing to take this fellow to be—I will not say her husband, but—her lord and master; she offers him herself and all that she possesses. On his account she has now spent four months here asking him to be her companion on her journey home, but he, for some reason which I cannot fathom, is too proud to consent; I suppose that he thinks that his Leucippe will come to life again." “Satyrus,” said Clinias, “seems to me to talk reason. When beauty, wealth, and love beckon you all at once, it is no time for sitting down and procrastination: her beauty will bring you pleasure, her wealth luxurious living, and her love the respect of men. God hates the proud, so come, allow yourself to be persuaded by Satyrus and obey God’s will.” “Take me where you will,” I said, with a groan, “if Clinias too approved; but on the one condition that this tiresome woman shall not trouble and press me to become her husband in deed until we arrive at Ephesus; I have some time ago taken an oath that I will have nothing to do with any woman here where I lost Leucippe.” Immediately that Satyrusdote on him a woman so beautiful that you might take her for a lovely statue; she is an Ephesian by race, her name is Melite; she is very rich, and young. Her husband has lately been lost at sea, and now she is willing to take this fellow to be—I will not say her husband, but—her lord and master; she offers him herself and all that she possesses. On his account she has now spent four months here asking him to be her companion on her journey home, but he, for some reason which I cannot fathom, is too proud to consent; I suppose that he thinks that his Leucippe will come to life again." “Satyrus,” said Clinias, “seems to me to talk reason. When beauty, wealth, and love beckon you all at once, it is no time for sitting down and procrastination: her beauty will bring you pleasure, her wealth luxurious living, and her love the respect of men. God hates the proud, so come, allow yourself to be persuaded by Satyrus and obey God’s will.” “Take me where you will,” I said, with a groan, “if Clinias too approved; but on the one condition that this tiresome woman shall not trouble and press me to become her husband in deed until we arrive at Ephesus; I have some time ago taken an oath that I will have nothing to do with any woman here where I lost Leucippe.” Immediately that Satyrus heard this, he hurried to Melite to take her the good news and very soon returned to report that when she had heard his message she very nearly expired from delight; also, that I must go that very day to dine with her as the prelude to our coming union.
 I agreed to this and repaired to her. When she saw me, she jumped up, embraced me and covered my face with kisses. She was indeed beautiful; you might describe her face as of the colour and texture of milk, the rose also growing in her cheeks; her look shone with a splendour proper to the goddess of love, and her hair was long and thick and golden, so that I had to admit that it was not without pleasure that I beheld her. The dinner she provided was sumptuous; she took a portion of the meats set before her, so as to appear to eat, but could swallow nothing of the food; she did nothing but gaze upon me. To lovers there is no delight save in the object of love, which occupies the whole of their soul, and leaves no place in it for the pleasures of the table. The pleasure which comes from vision enters by the eyes and makes its home in the breast; bearing with it ever the image of the beloved, it impresses it upon the mirror of the soul and leaves there its image; the emanation given off by beauty travels by invisible rays to the lovesick heart and imprints upon it its photograph. Realizing the position, I said to her, “How is this? Do you take nothing of the dainties you have yourself provided? You consume no more than those who are painted as eating.” “What costly dish,” saidheard this, he hurried to Melite to take her the good news and very soon returned to report that when she had heard his message she very nearly expired from delight; also, that I must go that very day to dine with her as the prelude to our coming union. I agreed to this and repaired to her. When she saw me, she jumped up, embraced me and covered my face with kisses. She was indeed beautiful; you might describe her face as of the colour and texture of milk, the rose also growing in her cheeks; her look shone with a splendour proper to the goddess of love, and her hair was long and thick and golden, so that I had to admit that it was not without pleasure that I beheld her. The dinner she provided was sumptuous; she took a portion of the meats set before her, so as to appear to eat, but could swallow nothing of the food; she did nothing but gaze upon me. To lovers there is no delight save in the object of love, which occupies the whole of their soul, and leaves no place in it for the pleasures of the table. The pleasure which comes from vision enters by the eyes and makes its home in the breast; bearing with it ever the image of the beloved, it impresses it upon the mirror of the soul and leaves there its image; the emanation given off by beauty travels by invisible rays to the lovesick heart and imprints upon it its photograph. Realizing the position, I said to her, “How is this? Do you take nothing of the dainties you have yourself provided? You consume no more than those who are painted as eating.” “What costly dish,” said she, “what wine could be more agreeable to me than the sight of you?” As she spoke, she kissed me, and it was not without pleasure that I received her kisses; then, as she tore herself from me—“That is my sustenance,” she said.
 For the time we continued in this manner; and when evening came she did her best to make me pass the night there. Ι, however, begged to be excused, using the same words to her that I had previously spoken to Satyrus. She let me go, though hardly and in distress; and it was agreed upon between us that the next day we should meet at the temple of Isis in order to discuss our future and take the goddess as witness to our troth. Menelaus and Clinias came there with us, and we took oaths, I to love her honourably, and she to make me her husband and declare me master of all that she possessed. “Our actual arrival at Ephesus,” I said, “must be time enough for you for the completion of our nuptials; here, as I said, you must be content to give place to Leucippe.” A rich banquet was then prepared for us: it was called a wedding breakfast, though we had agreed to defer the consummation of the marriage. I remember a good joke made by Melite during the feast; the guests were calling down blessings upon our espousals, when she quietly nodded towards me, saying: “I seem to be unique in having an unheard of experience, and one that generally happens only in the case of the dead whose bodies cannot be found; I have often seen a tenantless catafalque, butshe, “what wine could be more agreeable to me than the sight of you?” As she spoke, she kissed me, and it was not without pleasure that I received her kisses; then, as she tore herself from me—“That is my sustenance,” she said. For the time we continued in this manner; and when evening came she did her best to make me pass the night there. Ι, however, begged to be excused, using the same words to her that I had previously spoken to Satyrus. She let me go, though hardly and in distress; and it was agreed upon between us that the next day we should meet at the temple of Isis in order to discuss our future and take the goddess as witness to our troth. Menelaus and Clinias came there with us, and we took oaths, I to love her honourably, and she to make me her husband and declare me master of all that she possessed. “Our actual arrival at Ephesus,” I said, “must be time enough for you for the completion of our nuptials; here, as I said, you must be content to give place to Leucippe.” A rich banquet was then prepared for us: it was called a wedding breakfast, though we had agreed to defer the consummation of the marriage. I remember a good joke made by Melite during the feast; the guests were calling down blessings upon our espousals, when she quietly nodded towards me, saying: “I seem to be unique in having an unheard of experience, and one that generally happens only in the case of the dead whose bodies cannot be found; I have often seen a tenantless catafalque, but never a tenantless marriage-bed”—a jest that was half in earnest.
 On the next day we made our preparations for departure, being by good chance invited by a favourable wind. Menelaus came with us to the harbour and bade us god-speed, telling us that on this occasion we should find a sea that was more friendly to us; he then left us, a young man who was the truest of friends and of a nature better than mortal; his eyes filled with tears and we were all constrained to weep in return. Clinias decided not to leave me, but to sail with me as far as Ephesus, and, after remaining some time in that city, to return if he found my future prospects in fair case. The wind was fair behind us; it was now evening and we had dined and were retiring to rest; Melite and I had a cabin to ourselves which had been built on the upper deck; and there she flung her arms about me, kissed me, and asked me for the full rites of marriage: “Now,” said she, “we have traversed Leucippe’s boundaries and reached those of your promises; now begins the time when they are to be fulfilled. Why must I wait for our arrival at Ephesus? No one can be sure of what will happen at sea, and no trust can be placed in the changeful winds. Believe me, Clitophon, I am all afire—would that I could shew it to you—would that the fire of love had a like nature with that of the common element, in order that I might set you aflame by my embrace; but, as it is, this fire of mine, unlike other kinds, has its fuel in itself, and in lovers’ embraces it seems to burn up furiously but to sparenever a tenantless marriage-bed”—a jest that was half in earnest. On the next day we made our preparations for departure, being by good chance invited by a favourable wind. Menelaus came with us to the harbour and bade us god-speed, telling us that on this occasion we should find a sea that was more friendly to us; he then left us, a young man who was the truest of friends and of a nature better than mortal; his eyes filled with tears and we were all constrained to weep in return. Clinias decided not to leave me, but to sail with me as far as Ephesus, and, after remaining some time in that city, to return if he found my future prospects in fair case. The wind was fair behind us; it was now evening and we had dined and were retiring to rest; Melite and I had a cabin to ourselves which had been built on the upper deck; and there she flung her arms about me, kissed me, and asked me for the full rites of marriage: “Now,” said she, “we have traversed Leucippe’s boundaries and reached those of your promises; now begins the time when they are to be fulfilled. Why must I wait for our arrival at Ephesus? No one can be sure of what will happen at sea, and no trust can be placed in the changeful winds. Believe me, Clitophon, I am all afire—would that I could shew it to you—would that the fire of love had a like nature with that of the common element, in order that I might set you aflame by my embrace; but, as it is, this fire of mine, unlike other kinds, has its fuel in itself, and in lovers’ embraces it seems to burn up furiously but to spare the object of those embraces.
 Ο strange and mystic fire, fire that glows in secret and will not transgress the limits of the victim on whom it preys! Let us then, my dearest, become initiates in the sacred rites of Aphrodite.” “No,” said I, “force me not to do violence to the duty owed to the dead; we have not traversed the limits consecrated to that poor girl until we land in another country. Did you not hear that she perished at sea? I am now sailing over Leucippe’s grave, and perhaps her shade is even now hovering round the ship. They say that the souls of those who have met their end in the deep never go down to Hades, but wander in the same spot about the face of the waters; she may perhaps be present at our embraces. Then does this seem to you a spot suitable for the completion of our marriage? A marriage on the ocean wave, a marriage tossed by the deep? Could you bear that ours should be an unstable and rocking marriage-bed?” “You quibble, my dearest,” she cried; “lovers find every spot a possible marriage-bed, and Love is a god who finds nowhere inaccessible to him. Indeed where could a place be found more appropriate than on the sea for love and the mysteries of Aphrodite? Aphrodite is the sea’s daughter. Let us propitiate that goddess who presides over marriages and honour her mother by this marriage of ours. Yes, all that I see about seems to me to be emblematic of marriage: here is the yoke of marriage that hangs above our heads,the object of those embraces. Ο strange and mystic fire, fire that glows in secret and will not transgress the limits of the victim on whom it preys! Let us then, my dearest, become initiates in the sacred rites of Aphrodite.” “No,” said I, “force me not to do violence to the duty owed to the dead; we have not traversed the limits consecrated to that poor girl until we land in another country. Did you not hear that she perished at sea? I am now sailing over Leucippe’s grave, and perhaps her shade is even now hovering round the ship. They say that the souls of those who have met their end in the deep never go down to Hades, but wander in the same spot about the face of the waters; she may perhaps be present at our embraces. Then does this seem to you a spot suitable for the completion of our marriage? A marriage on the ocean wave, a marriage tossed by the deep? Could you bear that ours should be an unstable and rocking marriage-bed?” “You quibble, my dearest,” she cried; “lovers find every spot a possible marriage-bed, and Love is a god who finds nowhere inaccessible to him. Indeed where could a place be found more appropriate than on the sea for love and the mysteries of Aphrodite? Aphrodite is the sea’s daughter. Let us propitiate that goddess who presides over marriages and honour her mother by this marriage of ours. Yes, all that I see about seems to me to be emblematic of marriage: here is the yoke of marriage that hangs above our heads, there are the ties of marriage which depend from the yard—fine omens, my lord and master—our couch is beneath the yoke, and the ties are securely fastened.
 Here too is the rudder close to our couch, and Fortune is the helmsman that directs our espousals; our groomsman and bridesmaids are Poseidon and his train of Nereids; for it was here that he wedded Amphitrite. The wind too whistles tunefully in the rigging: I think that the breath of the gale is singing our bridal song. Then you also see the sail bellying out, like a woman’s fertile womb: this seems to me the most propitious of omens; I shall soon see you a father.” Seeing that she was in a coming-on humour, “Let us abstain,” I said, “like philosophers, dear lady, until we touch land. I swear to you by this very sea and by the good luck of our voyage, that I too am as anxious as you for fruition; but the sea too has its statutes, and I have often heard from seafaring men that ships should always be pure from the rites of love, perhaps because they themselves are sacred, or perhaps that there should be no dalliance in the dangerous state in which ship-board always is. Therefore, my dearest, do not let us inflict this insult on the sea—we do not want our marriage to have in it a large admixture of fear—let us keep our pleasure pure and undefiled.” Using these words I did my best to appease her with my kisses, and finally succeeded; we then went to sleep in the cabin, just as we were, for the rest of the time on board. It took us five days sail after this to reach Ephesus. Her house there was large and one of thethere are the ties of marriage which depend from the yard—fine omens, my lord and master—our couch is beneath the yoke, and the ties are securely fastened. Here too is the rudder close to our couch, and Fortune is the helmsman that directs our espousals; our groomsman and bridesmaids are Poseidon and his train of Nereids; for it was here that he wedded Amphitrite. The wind too whistles tunefully in the rigging: I think that the breath of the gale is singing our bridal song. Then you also see the sail bellying out, like a woman’s fertile womb: this seems to me the most propitious of omens; I shall soon see you a father.” Seeing that she was in a coming-on humour, “Let us abstain,” I said, “like philosophers, dear lady, until we touch land. I swear to you by this very sea and by the good luck of our voyage, that I too am as anxious as you for fruition; but the sea too has its statutes, and I have often heard from seafaring men that ships should always be pure from the rites of love, perhaps because they themselves are sacred, or perhaps that there should be no dalliance in the dangerous state in which ship-board always is. Therefore, my dearest, do not let us inflict this insult on the sea—we do not want our marriage to have in it a large admixture of fear—let us keep our pleasure pure and undefiled.” Using these words I did my best to appease her with my kisses, and finally succeeded; we then went to sleep in the cabin, just as we were, for the rest of the time on board. It took us five days sail after this to reach Ephesus. Her house there was large and one of the most important in the city, her servants numerous and her furniture costly.
 She first ordered a most elaborate dinner to be prepared; “Meanwhile,” said she, “we will visit my country seat.” This was about half a mile from the city, and we entered a carriage and set out for it. On our arrival we were walking through the rows of plants in the garden when suddenly there threw herself at our feet a woman wearing heavy fetters and holding a hoe, her head shorn, her person dirty, clad in a short and wretched garment. “Have pity on me,” she cried, “my lady, let a woman pity a woman, and one that was once free, and was born so, though now, by the decree of Fortune, a slave.” After these words she remained silent; so “Rise, woman,” said Μ elite, “say who you are and whence you come, and to whom you owe these fetters. Even in your misery your appearance proclaims aloud that you are of gentle birth.” “It is your steward,” she replied, “because I would not be a slave to his lusts. My name is Lacaena, I come from Thessaly. I lay before you this my fate with all supplication. Save me from this threatening disaster, grant me security until I can pay you the two thousand pieces of gold; that was the sum for which Sosthenes bought me from the hands of the pirates, and be sure that I can raise it with very small delay; if not, I will be your slave. Yes, and you can see how he has torn mymost important in the city, her servants numerous and her furniture costly. She first ordered a most elaborate dinner to be prepared; “Meanwhile,” said she, “we will visit my country seat.” This was about half a mile from the city, and we entered a carriage and set out for it. On our arrival we were walking through the rows of plants in the garden when suddenly there threw herself at our feet a woman wearing heavy fetters and holding a hoe, her head shorn, her person dirty, clad in a short and wretched garment. “Have pity on me,” she cried, “my lady, let a woman pity a woman, and one that was once free, and was born so, though now, by the decree of Fortune, a slave.” After these words she remained silent; so “Rise, woman,” said Μ elite, “say who you are and whence you come, and to whom you owe these fetters. Even in your misery your appearance proclaims aloud that you are of gentle birth.” “It is your steward,” she replied, “because I would not be a slave to his lusts. My name is Lacaena, I come from Thessaly. I lay before you this my fate with all supplication. Save me from this threatening disaster, grant me security until I can pay you the two thousand pieces of gold; that was the sum for which Sosthenes bought me from the hands of the pirates, and be sure that I can raise it with very small delay; if not, I will be your slave. Yes, and you can see how he has torn my flesh with many stripes,” and, as she spoke, she opened her tunic and shewed us her back most piteously marked and scarred.
 When we heard her story, while I was greatly moved, finding some look of Leucippe about her., Melite said, “Be of good cheer, woman: I will both deliver you from your present apprehension and will send you back to your own country without ransom. Let someone call Sosthenes hither to us.” The woman was at once freed from her fetters, and Sosthenes appeared before us greatly disordered. “Wretch,” said Melite to him, “have you ever seen even the most worthless of my slaves disfigured like this at my hands? Who is this woman? No lies, now: tell me the whole story.” “I know nothing, Madam,” said he, “save that a dealer named Callisthenes sold her to me, saying that he had bought her from some pirates, and that she was of free birth. The dealer said that her name was Lacaena.” Melite deposed him from his stewardship, and handed over the woman to her serving-maids, bidding them wash her, clothe her in clean garments, and bring her to town. Then, having settled the business connected with her country place, the object of her journey thither, she entered the carriage with me and returned to the city, where we set about our dinner. I was about at the middle of the banquet when Satyrus indicated to me by signs to come aside, with a grave expression on his face. I therefore made some excuse about belly-trouble, and left the table. When I had come to him, he said nothing, but handed me a letter. Even as I took it from him, before I began to read it, I was thunder-struck; forflesh with many stripes,” and, as she spoke, she opened her tunic and shewed us her back most piteously marked and scarred. When we heard her story, while I was greatly moved, finding some look of Leucippe about her., Melite said, “Be of good cheer, woman: I will both deliver you from your present apprehension and will send you back to your own country without ransom. Let someone call Sosthenes hither to us.” The woman was at once freed from her fetters, and Sosthenes appeared before us greatly disordered. “Wretch,” said Melite to him, “have you ever seen even the most worthless of my slaves disfigured like this at my hands? Who is this woman? No lies, now: tell me the whole story.” “I know nothing, Madam,” said he, “save that a dealer named Callisthenes sold her to me, saying that he had bought her from some pirates, and that she was of free birth. The dealer said that her name was Lacaena.” Melite deposed him from his stewardship, and handed over the woman to her serving-maids, bidding them wash her, clothe her in clean garments, and bring her to town. Then, having settled the business connected with her country place, the object of her journey thither, she entered the carriage with me and returned to the city, where we set about our dinner. I was about at the middle of the banquet when Satyrus indicated to me by signs to come aside, with a grave expression on his face. I therefore made some excuse about belly-trouble, and left the table. When I had come to him, he said nothing, but handed me a letter. Even as I took it from him, before I began to read it, I was thunder-struck; for I recognized Leucippe’s writing! This was the tenor of it.
 At this message I was moved with many emotions at once; I was flushed and pale, I was astonished and incredulous, I was full of joy and sorrow. “Do you come bringing this letter from Hades?” I said to Satyrus, “or what does this mean?I recognized Leucippe’s writing! This was the tenor of it. At this message I was moved with many emotions at once; I was flushed and pale, I was astonished and incredulous, I was full of joy and sorrow. “Do you come bringing this letter from Hades?” I said to Satyrus, “or what does this mean? Has Leucippe come to life again?” “She has,” he replied, “and it was she whom you saw at the country place.
 No one would recognise her in that case, looking, as she did, like a boy—the cutting-off of her hair had alone so changed her.” “Do you stop there,” I cried, “at such good news, bringing these good tidings to my ears only, without also delighting my eyes by the sight of her?” “Stay,” said Satyrus, “take no rash action, lest you ruin us all, until we have been able to decide upon some safe course in this matter. You see here a woman, one of the greatest among the Ephesians, doting upon you, and us without help in the midst of the toils.” “I cannot,” I replied; “joy is coursing through all the veins of my body. Look, she reproaches me in the letter she has written.” As I spoke I went through it again, imagining that I could see her in it, and as I read it sentence by sentence, I exclaimed: “Your reproaches are just, my darling. All your sufferings have been for me; I am the cause of all your woes.” And when I came to the account of the scourges and the torments which Sosthenes had inflicted upon her, I wept as though I could myself see the tortures; consideration so fixed the eyes of my soul upon the message conveyed by the writing that the scene seemed positively enacted before me. I blushed deeply at the reproaches she heaped upon me in the matter of my marriage, just as if I had been caught in the very act of adultery; so ashamed did her letter make me.Has Leucippe come to life again?” “She has,” he replied, “and it was she whom you saw at the country place. No one would recognise her in that case, looking, as she did, like a boy—the cutting-off of her hair had alone so changed her.” “Do you stop there,” I cried, “at such good news, bringing these good tidings to my ears only, without also delighting my eyes by the sight of her?” “Stay,” said Satyrus, “take no rash action, lest you ruin us all, until we have been able to decide upon some safe course in this matter. You see here a woman, one of the greatest among the Ephesians, doting upon you, and us without help in the midst of the toils.” “I cannot,” I replied; “joy is coursing through all the veins of my body. Look, she reproaches me in the letter she has written.” As I spoke I went through it again, imagining that I could see her in it, and as I read it sentence by sentence, I exclaimed: “Your reproaches are just, my darling. All your sufferings have been for me; I am the cause of all your woes.” And when I came to the account of the scourges and the torments which Sosthenes had inflicted upon her, I wept as though I could myself see the tortures; consideration so fixed the eyes of my soul upon the message conveyed by the writing that the scene seemed positively enacted before me. I blushed deeply at the reproaches she heaped upon me in the matter of my marriage, just as if I had been caught in the very act of adultery; so ashamed did her letter make me.
 “Alas, Satyrus,” said I, “how shall I make my excuses to her? I am caught. Leucippe has condemned me, and perhaps I have become the object of her hatred. But tell me, how was she saved, and whose body was it that we buried?” “She will recount the whole story to you,” said Satyrus, “in due time; for the present it is your business to answer her and attempt to placate her. I swore to her that it was against your will that you had married your lady.” “What?” said I, “Did you tell her that I was married? You have ruined me.” “What nonsense! Does not the whole town know of your marriage?” “I swear by Hercules, Satyrus, and by this my present good fortune, that it has been no marriage.” “You are jesting, my friend; you pass the night with her.” “I know that I am telling you what seems incredible, but nothing has yet happened: to this day Clitophon is chaste as far as Melite is concerned. But tell me what to write; I am so stupefied by what has happened that I am all at a loss.” “I am certainly no better scholar than you,” said Satyrus: “surely it is Love himself that will dictate. Only be quick about it.” So I began to write:— 21.
 I banded the letter to Satyrus, and asked him to put my case before her in a favourable light; I then returned to the banquet, full both of delight and distress, as I knew that in the approaching night Melite would not permit that our marriage should fail to be consummated, and it was quite impossible for me, with Leucippe once again restored to me, even to look at another woman. However, I tried to preserve my expression unaltered from what it was before; but I could not entirely control my emotions, and, as I felt them becoming too strong for me, I pretended that I felt a shivering creeping through me. She suspected this was a prevaricating prelude to evade my promise; but she was unable at present to prove that I was in fact thus prevaricating. I then arose from the table without my dinner, saying that I must retire to bed; she also instantly leapt to her feet and followed me, leaving the meal half-eaten. When we arrived at my bed-chamber, I made a still further pretence of indisposition; but she importuned me the more, saying: “Why do you do this? How long are you going thus to break my heart? We have finished our sea-journey; here is Ephesus, the place promised for the completion of our marriage. For what day are we waiting now? How long are we to spend our nights as if we were in church? You set before my eyes a fair river and I banded the letter to Satyrus, and asked him to put my case before her in a favourable light; I then returned to the banquet, full both of delight and distress, as I knew that in the approaching night Melite would not permit that our marriage should fail to be consummated, and it was quite impossible for me, with Leucippe once again restored to me, even to look at another woman. However, I tried to preserve my expression unaltered from what it was before; but I could not entirely control my emotions, and, as I felt them becoming too strong for me, I pretended that I felt a shivering creeping through me. She suspected this was a prevaricating prelude to evade my promise; but she was unable at present to prove that I was in fact thus prevaricating. I then arose from the table without my dinner, saying that I must retire to bed; she also instantly leapt to her feet and followed me, leaving the meal half-eaten. When we arrived at my bed-chamber, I made a still further pretence of indisposition; but she importuned me the more, saying: “Why do you do this? How long are you going thus to break my heart? We have finished our sea-journey; here is Ephesus, the place promised for the completion of our marriage. For what day are we waiting now? How long are we to spend our nights as if we were in church? You set before my eyes a fair river and then forbid me to drink.
 All this time I have water to hand, and yet I thirst, though I sleep at the water’s very fount; my bed is like the banquet of Tantalus.” Thus she spoke and wept, laying her head on my bosom so very pitiably that I really felt my heart to some extent moved with sympathy for her. I was in great confusion, particularly as I could not but admit that her reproaches were just. I therefore said to her: “I swear to you, my dearest, by the gods of my fathers, that I too am equally anxious with you to return your passion. But I do not know,” said I, “what is the matter with me. Some sudden illness has come upon me, and you know that love without sound health is worse than nothing.” While I spoke, I kept wiping away her tears, and I vowed with new oaths that it should not be long before she should obtain that which she desired. Then, and only with difficulty, did she consent to refrain. On the morrow she sent for the serving-maids to whom she had entrusted the care of Leucippe, and asked them first of all whether they had attended her with all skill and care; when they answered that she had lacked nothing of all that was necessary, she ordered that she should be brought before her. On her arrival, “I need not recount to you,” she said, “because you already know, the kindness that I have felt towards you; you deserve it; now, as far as you are able, reward me with an equal favour. I understand that you Thessalian women, when you fall in love, are able to conjure in such athen forbid me to drink. All this time I have water to hand, and yet I thirst, though I sleep at the water’s very fount; my bed is like the banquet of Tantalus.” Thus she spoke and wept, laying her head on my bosom so very pitiably that I really felt my heart to some extent moved with sympathy for her. I was in great confusion, particularly as I could not but admit that her reproaches were just. I therefore said to her: “I swear to you, my dearest, by the gods of my fathers, that I too am equally anxious with you to return your passion. But I do not know,” said I, “what is the matter with me. Some sudden illness has come upon me, and you know that love without sound health is worse than nothing.” While I spoke, I kept wiping away her tears, and I vowed with new oaths that it should not be long before she should obtain that which she desired. Then, and only with difficulty, did she consent to refrain. On the morrow she sent for the serving-maids to whom she had entrusted the care of Leucippe, and asked them first of all whether they had attended her with all skill and care; when they answered that she had lacked nothing of all that was necessary, she ordered that she should be brought before her. On her arrival, “I need not recount to you,” she said, “because you already know, the kindness that I have felt towards you; you deserve it; now, as far as you are able, reward me with an equal favour. I understand that you Thessalian women, when you fall in love, are able to conjure in such a way that your lover never inclines to any other woman, and is so firmly attached to the woman who has bewitched him that he considers her his all-in-all.
 Now, dear woman, I am afire; prepare me this magic draught. Did you see that young man who was walking with me yesterday?” “Do you mean your husband? “said Leucippe, interrupting her maliciously; “at least, I heard that he was such from the people of your household.” “Husband indeed!” cried Melite; “as good a husband as a stone would be! Some dead woman seems to be my successful rival: both at board and in bed he does not seem to be able to forget the name of Leucippe—that is what he calls her. I, my dear, have been spending four months at Alexandria for his sake, beseeching, importuning, promising—what did I leave unsaid or undone that I thought could please him? But to all my prayers he was just as if he was made of iron, or wood, or some other senseless thing. At last, and with great difficulty, I won him over; but then only as far as seeing goes—I swear to you by the goddess of love herself that it is now five days that I have slept by his side, and every time I have left his bed as though it had been that of an eunuch. I seem to have fallen in love with a statue—I have a lover who is nothing more than an eye-pleaser. Now I make to you the same prayer that you made to me yesterday, that a woman should pity a woman: give me something that will be effectual on this proud fellow. Thus you can save my breaking heart.” Leucippe, on hearing this, was naturally delighted that nothing further had passedway that your lover never inclines to any other woman, and is so firmly attached to the woman who has bewitched him that he considers her his all-in-all. Now, dear woman, I am afire; prepare me this magic draught. Did you see that young man who was walking with me yesterday?” “Do you mean your husband? “said Leucippe, interrupting her maliciously; “at least, I heard that he was such from the people of your household.” “Husband indeed!” cried Melite; “as good a husband as a stone would be! Some dead woman seems to be my successful rival: both at board and in bed he does not seem to be able to forget the name of Leucippe—that is what he calls her. I, my dear, have been spending four months at Alexandria for his sake, beseeching, importuning, promising—what did I leave unsaid or undone that I thought could please him? But to all my prayers he was just as if he was made of iron, or wood, or some other senseless thing. At last, and with great difficulty, I won him over; but then only as far as seeing goes—I swear to you by the goddess of love herself that it is now five days that I have slept by his side, and every time I have left his bed as though it had been that of an eunuch. I seem to have fallen in love with a statue—I have a lover who is nothing more than an eye-pleaser. Now I make to you the same prayer that you made to me yesterday, that a woman should pity a woman: give me something that will be effectual on this proud fellow. Thus you can save my breaking heart.” Leucippe, on hearing this, was naturally delighted that nothing further had passed between myself and Melite.
 She said that, if leave were given her, she would look for the necessary herbs in the fields, and set off thither; for she thought that she would not be believed if she said that she had no knowledge of magic, and this was the reason, I suppose, that she promised to do her best. Melite, through the action of hope alone, became somewhat more calm: the thought of future joys, even though they are not yet apparent, exercises a soothing effect by means of hope. I knew nothing of all this, and was in great distress; I was wondering how to put off Melite for the coming night, and how I could manage to meet Leucippe face to face; . . . she seemed to me to be aiming at the same object, in going with some help from Melite, into the country and returning towards evening. Melite was going to provide a carriage for Leucippe. . . . We were now coming to the time for taking wine, and had but just sat down to it, when a great shouting and sound of running about arose in the men’s quarters, and a servant came running in, panting, and crying out: “Thersander is alive and here!” Now this Thersander was Melite’s husband, believed by her to have perished at sea: some of the servants, who happened to be with him when his boat was overturned, had afterwards been saved, and, thinking that he had perished, had spread the report of his death. The servant was still speaking when Thersander rushed in close on his heels: he had heard all about me on his way back, and was hurryingbetween myself and Melite. She said that, if leave were given her, she would look for the necessary herbs in the fields, and set off thither; for she thought that she would not be believed if she said that she had no knowledge of magic, and this was the reason, I suppose, that she promised to do her best. Melite, through the action of hope alone, became somewhat more calm: the thought of future joys, even though they are not yet apparent, exercises a soothing effect by means of hope. I knew nothing of all this, and was in great distress; I was wondering how to put off Melite for the coming night, and how I could manage to meet Leucippe face to face; . . . she seemed to me to be aiming at the same object, in going with some help from Melite, into the country and returning towards evening. Melite was going to provide a carriage for Leucippe. . . . We were now coming to the time for taking wine, and had but just sat down to it, when a great shouting and sound of running about arose in the men’s quarters, and a servant came running in, panting, and crying out: “Thersander is alive and here!” Now this Thersander was Melite’s husband, believed by her to have perished at sea: some of the servants, who happened to be with him when his boat was overturned, had afterwards been saved, and, thinking that he had perished, had spread the report of his death. The servant was still speaking when Thersander rushed in close on his heels: he had heard all about me on his way back, and was hurrying so as to be sure to catch me.
 Melite jumped up, thunderstruck at the strangeness of the situation, and made as if to embrace her husband; but he thrust her violently from him, and, seeing me, “There is the gallant,” he cried; he leaped at me and struck me on the forehead a blow full of fury. He then seized me by the hair, bore me to the floor, and, falling upon me, rained blows on me. I knew as little as though I were at the celebration of some secret mystery who the man was or why he was beating me; though, suspecting that there was something wrong, I was afraid to defend myself, though I could have done so. When he grew tired of pounding me (and I of my reasoning), I rose and said: “Who are you, sir, and why have you assaulted me in this way?” He was still more angry at my speech and struck me again, and then called for chains and fetters; his servants bound me and threw me into a closet. While all this was happening, I did not observe that I had dropped Leucippe’s letter: I had happened to have fastened it under my coat to the border of my shirt. Melite privately picked it up, fearing that it was one of her letters to me. When she was alone she read it, and directly she found the name of Leucippe, she was cut to the heart on recognizing the name; she never guessed that the woman could be she, as she had heard so often that she had perished. When she went on and finished the rest of what was written, and so learned the whole truth, her heart was the scene of conflicting emotions—shame, and anger, and love, and jealousy.so as to be sure to catch me. Melite jumped up, thunderstruck at the strangeness of the situation, and made as if to embrace her husband; but he thrust her violently from him, and, seeing me, “There is the gallant,” he cried; he leaped at me and struck me on the forehead a blow full of fury. He then seized me by the hair, bore me to the floor, and, falling upon me, rained blows on me. I knew as little as though I were at the celebration of some secret mystery who the man was or why he was beating me; though, suspecting that there was something wrong, I was afraid to defend myself, though I could have done so. When he grew tired of pounding me (and I of my reasoning), I rose and said: “Who are you, sir, and why have you assaulted me in this way?” He was still more angry at my speech and struck me again, and then called for chains and fetters; his servants bound me and threw me into a closet. While all this was happening, I did not observe that I had dropped Leucippe’s letter: I had happened to have fastened it under my coat to the border of my shirt. Melite privately picked it up, fearing that it was one of her letters to me. When she was alone she read it, and directly she found the name of Leucippe, she was cut to the heart on recognizing the name; she never guessed that the woman could be she, as she had heard so often that she had perished. When she went on and finished the rest of what was written, and so learned the whole truth, her heart was the scene of conflicting emotions—shame, and anger, and love, and jealousy.
 She felt shame as regarded her husband, and anger at the letter: love made her anger inclined to cool, while jealousy fired her love, though love was in the end victorious. It was now towards evening; Thersander, in his first fit of rage, had rushed out to the house of one of his friends who lived close by. Melite addressed herself to the man to whom had been entrusted the charge of watching over me, and came secretly to me, setting a couple of her servants at the door to watch. She found me lying on the ground, and, as she stood over me, she seemed to design to give utterance to all her thoughts at once: in the expression of her face gleamed all the different emotions to which she would have liked to give vent in speech. “How wretched am I,” she said, “who saw you first to my own undoing, who loved with a love that had no fulfilment and was mere folly, who was hated and love him that hated me, who was wounded and pity him that wounded me; and even the insults I have suffered do not extinguish my love. A fine pair you are of magicians, male and female, working your arts against me: one of you was laughing at me the whole time, while the other went off to bring me a love-philtre—I, poor I, did not know that I was begging for a magical drug, to be used against myself, from my deadliest enemies.” As she spoke, she threw down Leucippe’s letter in front of me; when I saw it and recognised what it was, I shuddered, and kept my eyes fixed on the ground like a man caught in the commission of some crime. Then she went on again in the same emotional style: “Wretched, wretched woman that I am! I have lost my husband for you, and now, after this, I may not even possess you to the extent of seeing you, which is as much pleasure as you have yet vouchsafed me; I know that my husband has come to hate me, and has believed me guilty of adultery on your account—a fruitless, pleasureless adultery, from which my only gain has been abuse.
 Other women at least obtain as a reward of their shame the pleasurable satisfaction of their desires; I have reaped the shame well enough, poor I, but have nowhere found the pleasure. Faithless, savage wretch! How could you bear to see a woman thus pining away for love, when you too were Love’s slave? Did you not fear his wrath? Had you no apprehension of his fire? No respect for his mysteries? Could not these weeping eyes of mine melt you? More brutal than a pirate! A pirate is at least moved by tears. Could nothing rouse you even to one trance of love, not my prayers, not the time you spent in my company, not our mutual embrace, breast to breast? No, and what is of all the most cruel insult to me, you have clung to me and kissed me, and then risen from my side as passionless as another woman. What is this wretched shadow of a marriage? It was not as if your mate had been an old woman or one who rejected your embraces; 1 am young and inclined to love, and anybody else would say that I was fair. Miserable eunuch—woman-man—beauty’s wet-blanket; I call down upon you the justest curse of all: may Love requite you in your passions the same treatment that you have meted out to mine.” Thus she spoke, and at the same moment burst into tears.not even possess you to the extent of seeing you, which is as much pleasure as you have yet vouchsafed me; I know that my husband has come to hate me, and has believed me guilty of adultery on your account—a fruitless, pleasureless adultery, from which my only gain has been abuse. Other women at least obtain as a reward of their shame the pleasurable satisfaction of their desires; I have reaped the shame well enough, poor I, but have nowhere found the pleasure. Faithless, savage wretch! How could you bear to see a woman thus pining away for love, when you too were Love’s slave? Did you not fear his wrath? Had you no apprehension of his fire? No respect for his mysteries? Could not these weeping eyes of mine melt you? More brutal than a pirate! A pirate is at least moved by tears. Could nothing rouse you even to one trance of love, not my prayers, not the time you spent in my company, not our mutual embrace, breast to breast? No, and what is of all the most cruel insult to me, you have clung to me and kissed me, and then risen from my side as passionless as another woman. What is this wretched shadow of a marriage? It was not as if your mate had been an old woman or one who rejected your embraces; 1 am young and inclined to love, and anybody else would say that I was fair. Miserable eunuch—woman-man—beauty’s wet-blanket; I call down upon you the justest curse of all: may Love requite you in your passions the same treatment that you have meted out to mine.” Thus she spoke, and at the same moment burst into tears.
 I still kept silent, my head bowed to the ground, and after a little while she went on in changed mood: “What I have just said, my dearest, has been the utterance of anger and grief; what I am now going to say comes from the prompting of love. Though I be angry, yet I burn; though I be insulted and despised, still I love. Come to terms now and pity me; no longer do I ask for length of days and a long life’s wedded love, which I was unhappy enough to dream of, in your company. Now one embrace will be enough for me. I ask but for a little medicine for my long disease; quench but for a moment, the fire with which I burn. If I raged against you without restraint, forgive me, my dear; an unhappy love becomes actually mad. I know that I am lost to all sense of shame—but 1 feel no shame in speaking openly of Love’s mysteries: I speak to one who is already an adept in them. You know what I suffer; other men have never seen that god’s darts, and none can clearly discern the shots of his bow, save that lovers alone recognize the wounds suffered by their kind. I still have this day, and this day only, and I claim the fulfilment of your promise. Remember Isis, respect the oaths you swore before her altar; if you had been willing to be my lover, as there you swore, I would have recked nought of ten thousand Thersanders. If, now you have found Leucippe, marriage with another woman is no longer possible for you, I willingly grant you even this. I know I am beaten; I ask for nothing more than I am able to obtain. All sorts of miracles happen to my hurt: even the dead come to life. Cruel sea, to let me sail safely over thee, and then, after bringing me safe home, to work my deeper destruction by twice giving up thy dead.
 It was enough for Leucippe to be alive for Clitophon to desist from his grief; and now here is that savage, Thersander, with us. You have been beaten, Clitophon, before my eyes, and I was unhappy enough not to be able to help you. Did blows rain upon that face, ye gods? Surely Thersander must have been blind. Now I beseech you, my lord Clitophon—you are the lord of my heart—surrender yourself to me now for the first and last time: the few short moments will be to me like many days. If you agree to this, may you never lose your Leucippe, may she never even falsely seem to die again. Do not despise my love: through it all your great happiness has come. It has given you back Leucippe; for if I had never fallen in love with you, if I had not brought you hither, Leucippe would still have been dead as far as you are concerned. Yes, Clitophon, there are such things as the gifts of Fortune! When a man finds a treasure, he always honours the place of its discovery; he puts up an altar, he brings an offering for sacrifice, he puts a garland upon the ground; you have found with me the treasure of love, and do you do nothing to requite the good it has brought you? Imagine that Love is speaking thus to you through me: ‘Grant this favour to me, Clitophon, who will lead thee into my mysteries: do not depart and leave Melite without initiation; her fire too is from me.’ Then listenand then, after bringing me safe home, to work my deeper destruction by twice giving up thy dead. It was enough for Leucippe to be alive for Clitophon to desist from his grief; and now here is that savage, Thersander, with us. You have been beaten, Clitophon, before my eyes, and I was unhappy enough not to be able to help you. Did blows rain upon that face, ye gods? Surely Thersander must have been blind. Now I beseech you, my lord Clitophon—you are the lord of my heart—surrender yourself to me now for the first and last time: the few short moments will be to me like many days. If you agree to this, may you never lose your Leucippe, may she never even falsely seem to die again. Do not despise my love: through it all your great happiness has come. It has given you back Leucippe; for if I had never fallen in love with you, if I had not brought you hither, Leucippe would still have been dead as far as you are concerned. Yes, Clitophon, there are such things as the gifts of Fortune! When a man finds a treasure, he always honours the place of its discovery; he puts up an altar, he brings an offering for sacrifice, he puts a garland upon the ground; you have found with me the treasure of love, and do you do nothing to requite the good it has brought you? Imagine that Love is speaking thus to you through me: ‘Grant this favour to me, Clitophon, who will lead thee into my mysteries: do not depart and leave Melite without initiation; her fire too is from me.’ Then listen how I have taken care for all that concerns you.
 Soon shall you be loosed from these bonds, however little Thersander likes it, and you shall find a place of refuge for as long as you desire with a foster-brother of mine. There in the morning wait for Leucippe to come to you; she said that she was going to spend the night in the country looking for herbs, in order to cull them by moonlight. That was how she tricked me: for I asked her, thinking her a woman from Thessaly, for a philtre to be used upon you. What else could I do after all my failures but have recourse to herbs and magical drugs? That is the only resort for hopeless lovers. As for Thersander (I tell you this to assure you on this point too) he flung away from me out of the house in a rage, and has hurried to visit one of his friends; I cannot but think that some god has sent him away from here in order that I may be successful in gaining from you this last boon. Then do you give yourself to me!” After these subtle arguments—Love is a fine master of rhetoric—she loosed my bonds and kissed my hands, and placed them, first on her eyes and then upon her heart, saying: “You see how it leaps and its flutterings betoken anguish and hope—soon may they betoken pleasure—and seems by that very leaping to cry your mercy.” Ashow I have taken care for all that concerns you. Soon shall you be loosed from these bonds, however little Thersander likes it, and you shall find a place of refuge for as long as you desire with a foster-brother of mine. There in the morning wait for Leucippe to come to you; she said that she was going to spend the night in the country looking for herbs, in order to cull them by moonlight. That was how she tricked me: for I asked her, thinking her a woman from Thessaly, for a philtre to be used upon you. What else could I do after all my failures but have recourse to herbs and magical drugs? That is the only resort for hopeless lovers. As for Thersander (I tell you this to assure you on this point too) he flung away from me out of the house in a rage, and has hurried to visit one of his friends; I cannot but think that some god has sent him away from here in order that I may be successful in gaining from you this last boon. Then do you give yourself to me!” After these subtle arguments—Love is a fine master of rhetoric—she loosed my bonds and kissed my hands, and placed them, first on her eyes and then upon her heart, saying: “You see how it leaps and its flutterings betoken anguish and hope—soon may they betoken pleasure—and seems by that very leaping to cry your mercy.” As she loosed my fetters and threw her arms about me, now all in tears, I felt the claims of humanity too strong for me, and I was really afraid that the god of love would visit his wrath upon me; and besides I felt that I had regained Leucippe, and was in the near future about to be rid of Melite, and that anything that might take place could not possibly be regarded as a marriage, but only as medicine to an aching heart.
 I made no attempt therefore to escape from her encircling arms, and when she embraced me closer I did not resist her embraces, and soon all happened as Love would have it; nor did we feel at all the lack of a due couch or of any of the other accessories of pleasure. Love needs no teaching other than his own, and is an admirable improviser; he can make any place a proper spot for the celebration of his mysteries. And as regards such enjoyment, that which has not been too carefully prepared is better far than the meticulously elaborated; it has in itself its own genuine and natural pleasure.she loosed my fetters and threw her arms about me, now all in tears, I felt the claims of humanity too strong for me, and I was really afraid that the god of love would visit his wrath upon me; and besides I felt that I had regained Leucippe, and was in the near future about to be rid of Melite, and that anything that might take place could not possibly be regarded as a marriage, but only as medicine to an aching heart. I made no attempt therefore to escape from her encircling arms, and when she embraced me closer I did not resist her embraces, and soon all happened as Love would have it; nor did we feel at all the lack of a due couch or of any of the other accessories of pleasure. Love needs no teaching other than his own, and is an admirable improviser; he can make any place a proper spot for the celebration of his mysteries. And as regards such enjoyment, that which has not been too carefully prepared is better far than the meticulously elaborated; it has in itself its own genuine and natural pleasure.
 When therefore I had done my best to give Melite her cure, I said to her: “Now you must take care to ensure my safe escape, and to perform the rest of the promise which you made me about Leucippe.” “Do not be anxious on her account,” she answered; “you can consider that Leucippe is already yours. But do you put on my clothes, and cover your face with this garment. Melantho will shew you the way to the door, and then, just outside, there is waiting for you a young man who has instructions from me to convey you to the house where you will find Clinias and Satyrus, and Leucippe will soon be there with you.” With these words, she dressed me up to resemble herself; and then, kissing me, “How much more beautiful still,” said she, “you look in these clothes; you are like the Achilles that I once saw in a picture. I wish you good luck, my dearest; keep these garments to remind you of me, and leave me yours; when I put them on I shall still have the illusion of being in your embrace.” She then gave me a hundred pieces of gold, and called Melantho, who was her serving-maid and among those whom she could entirely trust; she had been sitting at the door.
 On her entry, she told her the arrangements that had been made about me, and bade her come back again to her directly that I was outside the house. I thus slipped out. The warder of the cell made way for me, thinking that I was his mistress, at a sign from Melantho, and I passed through the empty passages of the house to a door which was somewhat out of the way; and there the young man received me who had been appointed by Melite for this service. He was a freedman, one of those who had been with us on the voyage, and I had made friends with him previously. Melantho then went back and found the warder just locking the doors of the cell; she told him to open them again, and after he had complied with her request, she went in, told Melite of my safe evasion, and called in the keeper. He, as might only be expected, when he saw this extraordinary substitution, like that of the deer for the maiden in the fable, stood struck dumb. “It was no distrust in you,” said Melite to him, “lest you should be unwilling to let Clitophon out, that made me employ this stratagem, but so that in Thersander’s eyes you might be free of all blame, as one not privy to the plot. Here is a present for you of ten pieces of gold—a present from Clitophon if you choose to stay here, or journey-money if you think it would be better to take flight.” “Certainly,called Melantho, who was her serving-maid and among those whom she could entirely trust; she had been sitting at the door. On her entry, she told her the arrangements that had been made about me, and bade her come back again to her directly that I was outside the house. I thus slipped out. The warder of the cell made way for me, thinking that I was his mistress, at a sign from Melantho, and I passed through the empty passages of the house to a door which was somewhat out of the way; and there the young man received me who had been appointed by Melite for this service. He was a freedman, one of those who had been with us on the voyage, and I had made friends with him previously. Melantho then went back and found the warder just locking the doors of the cell; she told him to open them again, and after he had complied with her request, she went in, told Melite of my safe evasion, and called in the keeper. He, as might only be expected, when he saw this extraordinary substitution, like that of the deer for the maiden in the fable, stood struck dumb. “It was no distrust in you,” said Melite to him, “lest you should be unwilling to let Clitophon out, that made me employ this stratagem, but so that in Thersander’s eyes you might be free of all blame, as one not privy to the plot. Here is a present for you of ten pieces of gold—a present from Clitophon if you choose to stay here, or journey-money if you think it would be better to take flight.” “Certainly, Mistress,” said Pasion (that was the warder’s name), “I shall agree to whatever you think best.
 ” Melite advised him to go away for a time, and afterwards, when the relations between her and her husband were restored to tranquillity, and the latter’s rage was calmed, to return. This was the course he actually followed. As for me, Fortune, as usual, was hostile to me, and contrived a new plot against me; this was no less than to bring Thersander to meet me face to face. He had been persuaded by the friend to whom he had repaired not to sleep away from home, and, after dining, he was returning to his own house. It was the monthly festival of Artemis, and the whole place was full of drunken roysterers; the whole night long the entire market-place was occupied by crowds of people. I thought that this was my only danger; I never dreamed of another worse one that had been contrived for me. For Sosthenes, the man who had purchased Leucippe, who had been dismissed by Melite from his post as steward of the country estate, when he heard that his master had arrived, did not resign from his post but sought about how he might take vengeance on Melite. In the first place he began by telling Thersander all about me—his was the slander that led to my capture—and then he came with a plausible story that he had made up about Leucippe. Unable himself to gain possession of her for his own purposes, he adopted the character of pimp to his master, in order to widen the breach between him and Melite. “I have bought a girl, Master,” he said, “who is beautiful, aye a perfectMistress,” said Pasion (that was the warder’s name), “I shall agree to whatever you think best.” Melite advised him to go away for a time, and afterwards, when the relations between her and her husband were restored to tranquillity, and the latter’s rage was calmed, to return. This was the course he actually followed. As for me, Fortune, as usual, was hostile to me, and contrived a new plot against me; this was no less than to bring Thersander to meet me face to face. He had been persuaded by the friend to whom he had repaired not to sleep away from home, and, after dining, he was returning to his own house. It was the monthly festival of Artemis, and the whole place was full of drunken roysterers; the whole night long the entire market-place was occupied by crowds of people. I thought that this was my only danger; I never dreamed of another worse one that had been contrived for me. For Sosthenes, the man who had purchased Leucippe, who had been dismissed by Melite from his post as steward of the country estate, when he heard that his master had arrived, did not resign from his post but sought about how he might take vengeance on Melite. In the first place he began by telling Thersander all about me—his was the slander that led to my capture—and then he came with a plausible story that he had made up about Leucippe. Unable himself to gain possession of her for his own purposes, he adopted the character of pimp to his master, in order to widen the breach between him and Melite. “I have bought a girl, Master,” he said, “who is beautiful, aye a perfect miracle of beauty: believe it from hearsay, as though you actually saw her.
 I had been keeping her for you; I had heard that you were alive, and I believed it, because I desired it to be so. However, I did not make public my belief, in order that you might be able to catch my lady in the very act, and that a worthless paramour, a foreigner too, might not have the laugh of you. Yesterday my mistress took the girl from me, and purposed to send her away, but fortune has kept her for you, so that you will be able to get possession of this fair prize. She is now at the country estate, whither she has been sent for some object or other; if you like, I can shut her up before she comes back, so that she may be at your disposal.” Thersander praised him for his suggestion, and bade him act accordingly. Sosthenes therefore repaired with all haste to the country estate, and after inspecting the hut where Leucippe was to pass the night, took two of the labourers, and ordered them to employ the arts of deception upon the serving-maids who were with Leucippe by calling them away and keeping them at a distance on the pretence of having something to communicate to them; then, taking two others, when he saw that Leucippe was alone, he burst in upon her, and, after gagging her, seized her and went off in the opposite direction to that in which the maids had gone. He took her to a cottage in a secret spot, and depositing her there, spoke as follows: “I have come bringing you a mass of good fortune; see that you do not forget me when you are happy. Do not be frightened at the way you have thus been carriedmiracle of beauty: believe it from hearsay, as though you actually saw her. I had been keeping her for you; I had heard that you were alive, and I believed it, because I desired it to be so. However, I did not make public my belief, in order that you might be able to catch my lady in the very act, and that a worthless paramour, a foreigner too, might not have the laugh of you. Yesterday my mistress took the girl from me, and purposed to send her away, but fortune has kept her for you, so that you will be able to get possession of this fair prize. She is now at the country estate, whither she has been sent for some object or other; if you like, I can shut her up before she comes back, so that she may be at your disposal.” Thersander praised him for his suggestion, and bade him act accordingly. Sosthenes therefore repaired with all haste to the country estate, and after inspecting the hut where Leucippe was to pass the night, took two of the labourers, and ordered them to employ the arts of deception upon the serving-maids who were with Leucippe by calling them away and keeping them at a distance on the pretence of having something to communicate to them; then, taking two others, when he saw that Leucippe was alone, he burst in upon her, and, after gagging her, seized her and went off in the opposite direction to that in which the maids had gone. He took her to a cottage in a secret spot, and depositing her there, spoke as follows: “I have come bringing you a mass of good fortune; see that you do not forget me when you are happy. Do not be frightened at the way you have thus been carried off, or think that it portends any harm to you; it is the means by which my master is to become your lover.
 ” Thunderstruck at the incredible nature of her misfortune, she kept silence, while Sosthenes went off to Thersander, who was just returning home, and related what he had done, at the same time praising Leucippe’s beauty to the skies in high-flown language, with the result that the latter was excited by his words as though by some fair vision, instinct with beauty; and as the festival was going to last through the night, and it was only half a mile to the country place, he bade the steward lead on and set out to visit her. I was meanwhile going on, clad in Melite’s garments, and suddenly without any warning fell in with them face to face. Sosthenes was the first to recognize me; and, “Hulloa,” he cried, “here is the gallant coming roystering to meet us, and actually with your wife’s spoils upon him.” Now the young man who was acting as my guide was a little in front, and when he saw what was going to happen, he ran away, his fear preventing him from taking time to warn me. Thersander’s companions, when they spied me, laid hands upon me, and he himself raised so great a commotion that a crowd of the revellers collected. Thersander then took to more and more violent language, shouting all kinds of abusive terms at me, and calling me now adulterer, now thief; he then haled me off to the prison and handed me over to the constables, laying an information of adultery against me. I cared nothing for all this, the insult offered to me by the fetters and the abusive words: I felt confident that at the hearing I should be ableoff, or think that it portends any harm to you; it is the means by which my master is to become your lover.” Thunderstruck at the incredible nature of her misfortune, she kept silence, while Sosthenes went off to Thersander, who was just returning home, and related what he had done, at the same time praising Leucippe’s beauty to the skies in high-flown language, with the result that the latter was excited by his words as though by some fair vision, instinct with beauty; and as the festival was going to last through the night, and it was only half a mile to the country place, he bade the steward lead on and set out to visit her. I was meanwhile going on, clad in Melite’s garments, and suddenly without any warning fell in with them face to face. Sosthenes was the first to recognize me; and, “Hulloa,” he cried, “here is the gallant coming roystering to meet us, and actually with your wife’s spoils upon him.” Now the young man who was acting as my guide was a little in front, and when he saw what was going to happen, he ran away, his fear preventing him from taking time to warn me. Thersander’s companions, when they spied me, laid hands upon me, and he himself raised so great a commotion that a crowd of the revellers collected. Thersander then took to more and more violent language, shouting all kinds of abusive terms at me, and calling me now adulterer, now thief; he then haled me off to the prison and handed me over to the constables, laying an information of adultery against me. I cared nothing for all this, the insult offered to me by the fetters and the abusive words: I felt confident that at the hearing I should be able to clear myself of the charge of adultery, and to prove that my marriage had been open and public; but I was still afflicted with fear in the matter of Leucippe, because I had not yet definitely recovered her.
 The mind is ever inclined to be a prophet of ill, because we are seldom successful in the presages of good fortune that we make; I had therefore no consoling thought about Leucippe, but was full of suspicions and fears. Such was my uncomfortable state of mind. Thersander, after thrusting me into the gaol, started with all rapidity on his journey to Leucippe. Arriving at the cottage where she was, they found her lying on the ground and turning over in her mind what Sosthenes had said to her; the expression of her face shewed the presence together in her both of grief and fear. For I do not think that it is rightly said that the mind is entirely invisible: it can be accurately discerned in the face as in a mirror. When it is in a state of delight, it causes the appearance of joy to shine from the eyes; when in sorrow, it contracts the face in a manner that tells of the disaster that has occurred. So when Leucippe heard the doors open, and there was a lamp within, she looked up for a moment, and then let her eyes drop again. Thersander, after obtaining this cursory sight of her beauty, sudden as a flash of lightning, for the chiefest seat of beauty is in the eyes, found his whole heart set on her and stood spell-bound by the sight, waiting for her to look up again at him. But as she still kept her eyes fixed on the ground, “Why look down, maiden? “said he. “Why waste the loveliness of your eyes upon the earth? Rather let it sink deep into mine.”to clear myself of the charge of adultery, and to prove that my marriage had been open and public; but I was still afflicted with fear in the matter of Leucippe, because I had not yet definitely recovered her. The mind is ever inclined to be a prophet of ill, because we are seldom successful in the presages of good fortune that we make; I had therefore no consoling thought about Leucippe, but was full of suspicions and fears. Such was my uncomfortable state of mind. Thersander, after thrusting me into the gaol, started with all rapidity on his journey to Leucippe. Arriving at the cottage where she was, they found her lying on the ground and turning over in her mind what Sosthenes had said to her; the expression of her face shewed the presence together in her both of grief and fear. For I do not think that it is rightly said that the mind is entirely invisible: it can be accurately discerned in the face as in a mirror. When it is in a state of delight, it causes the appearance of joy to shine from the eyes; when in sorrow, it contracts the face in a manner that tells of the disaster that has occurred. So when Leucippe heard the doors open, and there was a lamp within, she looked up for a moment, and then let her eyes drop again. Thersander, after obtaining this cursory sight of her beauty, sudden as a flash of lightning, for the chiefest seat of beauty is in the eyes, found his whole heart set on her and stood spell-bound by the sight, waiting for her to look up again at him. But as she still kept her eyes fixed on the ground, “Why look down, maiden? “said he. “Why waste the loveliness of your eyes upon the earth? Rather let it sink deep into mine.” 7.
 On hearing these words, she burst into tears; and her tears too had a peculiar beauty of their own. Tears set off the eye and make its character more prominent: if it be ugly or coarse, they make it less pleasing still; if it be handsome, the pupil jet-black and surrounded by the white into which it insensibly shades, it becomes like a rich fountain-spring when it is bedewed with tears. The brine of the tear-drops coming down into the white of the eye makes it rich and shining, while the black takes on from the same cause a deep purple hue; it comes to resemble a violet, while the rest of the eye is like a narcissus, and the tears which are rolling within the eye almost seem to smile. Such were Leucippe’s tears, which overcame her very grief and made it into beauty; if they could have solidified after they had fallen, the world would have possessed a new variety of amber. When Thersander saw her thus, he was struck dumb with her beauty and maddened by the sight of her grief, and his own eyes filled with tears. Indeed tears are by their very nature exceedingly provocative of a beholder’s pity; those of a woman in particular have the more magic in their effects in proportion as they are the more abundant; be the woman fair, and he that sees her lover, his eye too cannot remain unmoved, but copies her weeping. Since, in the case of the beauteous, their beauty is in great part in their eyes, it therefore proceeding thence to the eyes of the beholder makes its home there and draws forth the fount of tears. Both—the beauty On hearing these words, she burst into tears; and her tears too had a peculiar beauty of their own. Tears set off the eye and make its character more prominent: if it be ugly or coarse, they make it less pleasing still; if it be handsome, the pupil jet-black and surrounded by the white into which it insensibly shades, it becomes like a rich fountain-spring when it is bedewed with tears. The brine of the tear-drops coming down into the white of the eye makes it rich and shining, while the black takes on from the same cause a deep purple hue; it comes to resemble a violet, while the rest of the eye is like a narcissus, and the tears which are rolling within the eye almost seem to smile. Such were Leucippe’s tears, which overcame her very grief and made it into beauty; if they could have solidified after they had fallen, the world would have possessed a new variety of amber. When Thersander saw her thus, he was struck dumb with her beauty and maddened by the sight of her grief, and his own eyes filled with tears. Indeed tears are by their very nature exceedingly provocative of a beholder’s pity; those of a woman in particular have the more magic in their effects in proportion as they are the more abundant; be the woman fair, and he that sees her lover, his eye too cannot remain unmoved, but copies her weeping. Since, in the case of the beauteous, their beauty is in great part in their eyes, it therefore proceeding thence to the eyes of the beholder makes its home there and draws forth the fount of tears. Both—the beauty and the tears—are received into the lover’s being: the beauty he takes to his heart, but his tears he keeps in his eyes, and hopes that it will be apparent that he is in such a state; even if he could wipe them away, he will not do so, but keeps them hanging there as best he may, and fears lest they should disappear before they have had their effect.
 He will even refrain from moving his eyes, so that the tears may not too quickly fall before the beloved sees them: he thinks that they form a true witness that he loves. This was the case with Thersander: he wept partly because he felt some human compassion, as was only natural, and partly to make a shew to Leucippe that he was weeping too because she wept. He therefore whispered to Sosthenes: “Do you look after her for the present—you see in how sorrowful a plight she is—and I will retire, though much against my will, so as not to trouble her: when she has come to a calmer state, I will then put my arguments before her. And you, maiden, be of good cheer; I will soon cure you of these tears.” Then, as he was going out, he spoke again to Sosthenes: “See that you give her a good account of me, and come to me in the morning when you have put all right.” With these words he left the cottage. While all this was happening, it chanced that Melite, after her visit to me, had sent a young man to the country seat after Leucippe, to bid her hasten to return, as there was no longer any need for the philtre. On his arrival there, he found the serving-maidsand the tears—are received into the lover’s being: the beauty he takes to his heart, but his tears he keeps in his eyes, and hopes that it will be apparent that he is in such a state; even if he could wipe them away, he will not do so, but keeps them hanging there as best he may, and fears lest they should disappear before they have had their effect. He will even refrain from moving his eyes, so that the tears may not too quickly fall before the beloved sees them: he thinks that they form a true witness that he loves. This was the case with Thersander: he wept partly because he felt some human compassion, as was only natural, and partly to make a shew to Leucippe that he was weeping too because she wept. He therefore whispered to Sosthenes: “Do you look after her for the present—you see in how sorrowful a plight she is—and I will retire, though much against my will, so as not to trouble her: when she has come to a calmer state, I will then put my arguments before her. And you, maiden, be of good cheer; I will soon cure you of these tears.” Then, as he was going out, he spoke again to Sosthenes: “See that you give her a good account of me, and come to me in the morning when you have put all right.” With these words he left the cottage. While all this was happening, it chanced that Melite, after her visit to me, had sent a young man to the country seat after Leucippe, to bid her hasten to return, as there was no longer any need for the philtre. On his arrival there, he found the serving-maids looking for Leucippe, and greatly disordered; as she could not be found anywhere, he hurried back and related all he knew to his mistress.
 Having first heard my case, how I had been clapped into gaol, and now about the disappearance of Leucippe, a cloud of grief descended upon her. She had no means of finding out the truth, but suspected Sosthenes; and desiring to shed light on her enquiry by means of Thersander, she devised an artful plan to be put into effect by means of questions, mingling a little truth with the story she had made up. When Thersander then came into the house, and began shouting again: “You have spirited away your gallant; you have loosed him from his fetters; you have got him out of the house! This is all your work; why do you not follow him? Why do you stay here? Why do you not get off to your beloved and see him now fettered in stronger bonds?” “Gallant indeed!” said Melite. “What is the matter with you? If you can but drop this fury of yours, and hear the whole story, you will have no difficulty in realising the truth. I only ask one thing of you—be an impartial judge, clear your ears of all the slander you have heard; expel anger from your heart and put reason into its place, the only unbiased arbiter. This young man has been neither my gallant nor my husband; he is a Phoenician by birth, and of a stock second to none among the people of Tyre. He too had an unfortunate voyage, and the whole cargo that he had shipped became the prey of the sea. I heard of his mishap and took pity on him; I thought of you, and offered him my hospitality. ‘Perhaps,’ I said,looking for Leucippe, and greatly disordered; as she could not be found anywhere, he hurried back and related all he knew to his mistress. Having first heard my case, how I had been clapped into gaol, and now about the disappearance of Leucippe, a cloud of grief descended upon her. She had no means of finding out the truth, but suspected Sosthenes; and desiring to shed light on her enquiry by means of Thersander, she devised an artful plan to be put into effect by means of questions, mingling a little truth with the story she had made up. When Thersander then came into the house, and began shouting again: “You have spirited away your gallant; you have loosed him from his fetters; you have got him out of the house! This is all your work; why do you not follow him? Why do you stay here? Why do you not get off to your beloved and see him now fettered in stronger bonds?” “Gallant indeed!” said Melite. “What is the matter with you? If you can but drop this fury of yours, and hear the whole story, you will have no difficulty in realising the truth. I only ask one thing of you—be an impartial judge, clear your ears of all the slander you have heard; expel anger from your heart and put reason into its place, the only unbiased arbiter. This young man has been neither my gallant nor my husband; he is a Phoenician by birth, and of a stock second to none among the people of Tyre. He too had an unfortunate voyage, and the whole cargo that he had shipped became the prey of the sea. I heard of his mishap and took pity on him; I thought of you, and offered him my hospitality. ‘Perhaps,’ I said, ‘Thersander is now a wanderer like him; perhaps some woman will take pity on him too.
 And if he has really perished at sea, as the report tells, let us do our best then for all the victims of shipwreck.’ How many others in such a plight did I not befriend? How many of the sea’s dead did I not bury, if but a plank of a wreck were washed ashore? and ‘Perhaps,’ 1 would say, ‘Thersander used to sail on the very ship of which this was a part?’ This man, then, was the last of my refugees saved from the waters; I thought that I was doing what I could for you by looking after him. He had gone on a voyage like you; I was honouring, my dear, the parallel to your fate. How then did I happen to be here in his company? I will tell you the whole true story. He happened to be mourning for the loss of his wife; but though he had lost her, she was not dead. Somebody informed him of this, and also that she was here, in the possession of one of our bailiffs; and told him the bailiffs name, Sosthenes. This was actually the case; we found the woman here when we arrived. This was the reason that he came with me. You have Sosthenes at your disposal, and she is here at our country place; make inquiries as to the truth of every particular that I have told you. If my story is false in any respect, I admit myself convicted of unfaithfulness.” This was the story she told, pretending that she knew nothing of Leucippe’s abduction; but on the other hand she held in reserve her power, if Thersander should attempt to discover the truth, of bringing forward the serving-maids in whose company Leucippe had departed, to say, if she did not reappear in the morning, that she could not be‘Thersander is now a wanderer like him; perhaps some woman will take pity on him too. And if he has really perished at sea, as the report tells, let us do our best then for all the victims of shipwreck.’ How many others in such a plight did I not befriend? How many of the sea’s dead did I not bury, if but a plank of a wreck were washed ashore? and ‘Perhaps,’ 1 would say, ‘Thersander used to sail on the very ship of which this was a part?’ This man, then, was the last of my refugees saved from the waters; I thought that I was doing what I could for you by looking after him. He had gone on a voyage like you; I was honouring, my dear, the parallel to your fate. How then did I happen to be here in his company? I will tell you the whole true story. He happened to be mourning for the loss of his wife; but though he had lost her, she was not dead. Somebody informed him of this, and also that she was here, in the possession of one of our bailiffs; and told him the bailiffs name, Sosthenes. This was actually the case; we found the woman here when we arrived. This was the reason that he came with me. You have Sosthenes at your disposal, and she is here at our country place; make inquiries as to the truth of every particular that I have told you. If my story is false in any respect, I admit myself convicted of unfaithfulness.” This was the story she told, pretending that she knew nothing of Leucippe’s abduction; but on the other hand she held in reserve her power, if Thersander should attempt to discover the truth, of bringing forward the serving-maids in whose company Leucippe had departed, to say, if she did not reappear in the morning, that she could not be found anywhere.
 She could thus openly continue her search for the girl, and at the same time compel Thersander to reveal his own plans. In addition to the plausible story that she had already contrived, she went on as follows: “Trust me, my husband; in all the period of our married life, you have never, my dear, had anything with which to reproach me, and do not now suspect me of anything of the kind. This rumour got abroad because of the care which I took of the young man; the community did not know the real reason of our association, and by rumour, you, too, were dead. Rumour and Slander are two kindred Furies: Rumour is Slander’s daughter. Slander is sharper than any sword, stronger than fire, more persuasive than a Siren; Rumour is more slippery than water, runs faster than the wind, flies quicker than any winged bird. When Slander shoots forth a lying report, it flies like an arrow and wounds him at whom it is aimed even though he is not present where the word is spoken; the hearer quickly believes it, the fire of his anger is kindled, and he is soon furious and mad against the object of the shot. Rumour, brought into being by the act of shooting, at once flows onward gaining in volume, and overwhelms the ears of all whom she meets; she travels far, like a wind, carried storm-wise on the gale of words; she flies, borne aloft by the wings of the human tongue. These two plagues are my enemies: they have captured your mind, and by their arguments they have shut against me the doors of your ears.”found anywhere. She could thus openly continue her search for the girl, and at the same time compel Thersander to reveal his own plans. In addition to the plausible story that she had already contrived, she went on as follows: “Trust me, my husband; in all the period of our married life, you have never, my dear, had anything with which to reproach me, and do not now suspect me of anything of the kind. This rumour got abroad because of the care which I took of the young man; the community did not know the real reason of our association, and by rumour, you, too, were dead. Rumour and Slander are two kindred Furies: Rumour is Slander’s daughter. Slander is sharper than any sword, stronger than fire, more persuasive than a Siren; Rumour is more slippery than water, runs faster than the wind, flies quicker than any winged bird. When Slander shoots forth a lying report, it flies like an arrow and wounds him at whom it is aimed even though he is not present where the word is spoken; the hearer quickly believes it, the fire of his anger is kindled, and he is soon furious and mad against the object of the shot. Rumour, brought into being by the act of shooting, at once flows onward gaining in volume, and overwhelms the ears of all whom she meets; she travels far, like a wind, carried storm-wise on the gale of words; she flies, borne aloft by the wings of the human tongue. These two plagues are my enemies: they have captured your mind, and by their arguments they have shut against me the doors of your ears.” 11.
 While she was still speaking, she took his hand and made as though to kiss him. He was already somewhat calmed by her words; and was both coaxed by the plausibility of what she said and had part of his suspicions removed by the harmony of her story with that of Sosthenes. However, he did not yet completely trust her: for when jealousy has once entered the heart, it is hard indeed to remove its stain. Then he was greatly vexed at hearing that the maiden was my wife, and this made him but hate me the more. For the time, he said that he would make further inquiries about the story that she had told him, and retired alone to bed; Melite, the while, was greatly distressed in that she had failed to perform her promise to me. Sosthenes, after accompanying Thersander on part of his journey home and encouraging him to hope for Leucippe’s favours, turned back again and went to her. He composed his face to wear an expression of delight, and, “We have succeeded, Lacaena,” he said. “Thersander is in love with you, madly in love, so that he is likely to make you his wife. All this success was my doing; for it was I who dilated at great length to him of your beauty, and have filled his heart with a violent fancy for you. Why do you weep? Up, and sacrifice to Aphrodite for your good fortune; and then mind you remember me too.” “I pray,” said Leucippe, “that you may have just such good fortune as you come and bring me now.” Sosthenes did not in the least understand her sarcasm, and went on in high good humour: “I want to tell you all about Thersander, to give you the better conceit of your good luck. He is the While she was still speaking, she took his hand and made as though to kiss him. He was already somewhat calmed by her words; and was both coaxed by the plausibility of what she said and had part of his suspicions removed by the harmony of her story with that of Sosthenes. However, he did not yet completely trust her: for when jealousy has once entered the heart, it is hard indeed to remove its stain. Then he was greatly vexed at hearing that the maiden was my wife, and this made him but hate me the more. For the time, he said that he would make further inquiries about the story that she had told him, and retired alone to bed; Melite, the while, was greatly distressed in that she had failed to perform her promise to me. Sosthenes, after accompanying Thersander on part of his journey home and encouraging him to hope for Leucippe’s favours, turned back again and went to her. He composed his face to wear an expression of delight, and, “We have succeeded, Lacaena,” he said. “Thersander is in love with you, madly in love, so that he is likely to make you his wife. All this success was my doing; for it was I who dilated at great length to him of your beauty, and have filled his heart with a violent fancy for you. Why do you weep? Up, and sacrifice to Aphrodite for your good fortune; and then mind you remember me too.” “I pray,” said Leucippe, “that you may have just such good fortune as you come and bring me now.” Sosthenes did not in the least understand her sarcasm, and went on in high good humour: “I want to tell you all about Thersander, to give you the better conceit of your good luck. He is the husband of Melite, the lady whom you saw at the country place; he is the very highest of all the Ionians in birth, his riches are above his birth, and his amiability above his riches.
 His looks you could see for yourself; how he is young and well-favoured, things that women particularly appreciate.” At this point Leucippe could no longer bear the vapourings of Sosthenes, but burst out: “You vile beast, how much longer are you going on polluting my ears? What do I care about Thersander? Let him be well-favoured for his Melite, and rich for his city, and amiable and generous for those who need it; I care for none of all these, whether he be nobler than Codrus, or richer than Croesus. Why go on piling up another’s praises to me? I shall esteem Thersander as a good man, when he stops forcing his attentions on other men’s wives.” Sosthenes’ tone then changed to earnest. “I suppose you are joking?” said he. “What could be my object in joking?” she cried. “Leave me alone, fellow, with my ill-fortune and the fate that constrains me; I know now that I have fallen among pirates.” “You seem to me,” he replied, “to be mad; and incurably mad. Is this what you call falling among pirates—wealth, marriage, luxury, when you get from Fortune a husband such as Thersander, whom the gods love so dearly that they saved him from the very gates of death?” And he went on to relate to her the story of his shipwreck, making his escape a matter of divinehusband of Melite, the lady whom you saw at the country place; he is the very highest of all the Ionians in birth, his riches are above his birth, and his amiability above his riches. His looks you could see for yourself; how he is young and well-favoured, things that women particularly appreciate.” At this point Leucippe could no longer bear the vapourings of Sosthenes, but burst out: “You vile beast, how much longer are you going on polluting my ears? What do I care about Thersander? Let him be well-favoured for his Melite, and rich for his city, and amiable and generous for those who need it; I care for none of all these, whether he be nobler than Codrus, or richer than Croesus. Why go on piling up another’s praises to me? I shall esteem Thersander as a good man, when he stops forcing his attentions on other men’s wives.” Sosthenes’ tone then changed to earnest. “I suppose you are joking?” said he. “What could be my object in joking?” she cried. “Leave me alone, fellow, with my ill-fortune and the fate that constrains me; I know now that I have fallen among pirates.” “You seem to me,” he replied, “to be mad; and incurably mad. Is this what you call falling among pirates—wealth, marriage, luxury, when you get from Fortune a husband such as Thersander, whom the gods love so dearly that they saved him from the very gates of death?” And he went on to relate to her the story of his shipwreck, making his escape a matter of divine providence, and embroidering it with more miracles than Arion and his dolphin.
 Leucippe made no answer to him as he was recounting his marvels; so he went on: “You had better regard your own interests, and not indulge in any of this kind of talk to Thersander, in case you should anger a naturally amiable man; for once roused to fury, there is no stopping him. Amiability grows and multiplies if it meets with gratitude, while if it meets with contempt it is irritated into anger; the more a man is naturally inclined to friendliness, the more forward is he to avenge a slight.” So much then for Leucippe’s plight. Clinias and Satyrus learning, by the information of Melite, that I was shut up in gaol, at once came hurriedly by night to the prison, and were anxious to stay there with me; but the gaoler refused and bade them begone about their business as quick as might be. They were thus driven away by him, though greatly against their will, after I had conjured them to come to me without delay in the morning to tell me if Leucippe had reappeared; I also related to them all Melite’s promises, and then I had to stay with my heart on the balance between hope and fear, my hopes afraid and my terrors with a vestige of hope. As soon as it was day Satyrus and his friends returned to me, while Sosthenes hurried to Thersander. Directly that Thersander saw him, he began to question him as to what progress was being made in the attempt to win Leucippe for him; to which question he did not reply the truth, but contrived an ingenious and plausible story. “Sheprovidence, and embroidering it with more miracles than Arion and his dolphin. Leucippe made no answer to him as he was recounting his marvels; so he went on: “You had better regard your own interests, and not indulge in any of this kind of talk to Thersander, in case you should anger a naturally amiable man; for once roused to fury, there is no stopping him. Amiability grows and multiplies if it meets with gratitude, while if it meets with contempt it is irritated into anger; the more a man is naturally inclined to friendliness, the more forward is he to avenge a slight.” So much then for Leucippe’s plight. Clinias and Satyrus learning, by the information of Melite, that I was shut up in gaol, at once came hurriedly by night to the prison, and were anxious to stay there with me; but the gaoler refused and bade them begone about their business as quick as might be. They were thus driven away by him, though greatly against their will, after I had conjured them to come to me without delay in the morning to tell me if Leucippe had reappeared; I also related to them all Melite’s promises, and then I had to stay with my heart on the balance between hope and fear, my hopes afraid and my terrors with a vestige of hope. As soon as it was day Satyrus and his friends returned to me, while Sosthenes hurried to Thersander. Directly that Thersander saw him, he began to question him as to what progress was being made in the attempt to win Leucippe for him; to which question he did not reply the truth, but contrived an ingenious and plausible story. “She still refuses,” he said, “but I do not think that her refusal is genuine and final; I fancy she suspects that after once enjoying her favours you will cast her off, and she shrinks from the insult that is thus offered to her.
 ” “As far as that goes,” said Thersander, “she need have no apprehensions; my feelings towards her are of such a nature that they can never die. There is only one thing about her of which I am really afraid, and I am exceedingly anxious to know the truth about it—whether she is really that young man’s wife, as Melite told me.” As they thus talked, they arrived at the cottage where Leucippe was, and as they approached the door, they heard her deliriously murmuring to herself; they therefore took up their position behind the door without making any noise. “Alas, Clitophon,” she was saying over and over again, “you do not know what has become of me and where I am imprisoned; and I know not either what has befallen you: the same ignorance is the unhappy lot of both of us. Did Thersander come upon you at the house? Have you too suffered insult and violence? Many is the time that I have desired to ask Sosthenes about you, but knew not how to inquire. If I asked of you as of my own husband, I was afraid that I might bring some new trouble upon you by embittering Thersander’s rage against you: if as of a stranger, that too would have been a matter of suspicion: for what should a woman care about others than those of her own family? How often did I try to force myself to ask,still refuses,” he said, “but I do not think that her refusal is genuine and final; I fancy she suspects that after once enjoying her favours you will cast her off, and she shrinks from the insult that is thus offered to her.” “As far as that goes,” said Thersander, “she need have no apprehensions; my feelings towards her are of such a nature that they can never die. There is only one thing about her of which I am really afraid, and I am exceedingly anxious to know the truth about it—whether she is really that young man’s wife, as Melite told me.” As they thus talked, they arrived at the cottage where Leucippe was, and as they approached the door, they heard her deliriously murmuring to herself; they therefore took up their position behind the door without making any noise. “Alas, Clitophon,” she was saying over and over again, “you do not know what has become of me and where I am imprisoned; and I know not either what has befallen you: the same ignorance is the unhappy lot of both of us. Did Thersander come upon you at the house? Have you too suffered insult and violence? Many is the time that I have desired to ask Sosthenes about you, but knew not how to inquire. If I asked of you as of my own husband, I was afraid that I might bring some new trouble upon you by embittering Thersander’s rage against you: if as of a stranger, that too would have been a matter of suspicion: for what should a woman care about others than those of her own family? How often did I try to force myself to ask, but could not persuade my tongue to speak! I could only keep on saying this: ‘My husband Clitophon, husband of Leucippe alone, faithful and steadfast! Another woman could not persuade you to be her own, no, not though she slept by your side, though I, heartless I, believed that you were hers! When I saw you in the garden after so long an interval of time, I would not even kiss you.
 ’ And now if Thersander comes again to ask me about myself, what shall I answer him? Shall I strip off the whole make-up and pretence of the long story and declare the truth? Think not, Thersander, that I am some servile chattel! I am the daughter of the commander-in-chief of the Byzantines, the wife of the first in rank among the people of Tyre; no Thessalian I, and my name is not Lacaena: this is but another instance of pirates’ violence; my very name too has been stolen from me. My husband is Clitophon, my fatherland Byzantium: Sostratus is my father, Panthea my mother. But you will hardly believe my words—and if you did, I should be afraid for Clitophon’s sake; my untimely frankness might be the ruin of him who is dearest to me. Come, let me play my part once more: let me once again assume the character of Lacaena!” When he had heard this Thersander drew away a little, and said to Sosthenes; “Did you hear her love-sick words, almost incredible as they were? What things she uttered! How she wailed! How she reproached herself! That lecher has the better of me everywhere; I think the cut-purse must be a wizard too. Melite loves him, Leucippe loves him; would God that I might become Clitophon!” “No,” said Sosthenes, “you must notbut could not persuade my tongue to speak! I could only keep on saying this: ‘My husband Clitophon, husband of Leucippe alone, faithful and steadfast! Another woman could not persuade you to be her own, no, not though she slept by your side, though I, heartless I, believed that you were hers! When I saw you in the garden after so long an interval of time, I would not even kiss you.’ And now if Thersander comes again to ask me about myself, what shall I answer him? Shall I strip off the whole make-up and pretence of the long story and declare the truth? Think not, Thersander, that I am some servile chattel! I am the daughter of the commander-in-chief of the Byzantines, the wife of the first in rank among the people of Tyre; no Thessalian I, and my name is not Lacaena: this is but another instance of pirates’ violence; my very name too has been stolen from me. My husband is Clitophon, my fatherland Byzantium: Sostratus is my father, Panthea my mother. But you will hardly believe my words—and if you did, I should be afraid for Clitophon’s sake; my untimely frankness might be the ruin of him who is dearest to me. Come, let me play my part once more: let me once again assume the character of Lacaena!” When he had heard this Thersander drew away a little, and said to Sosthenes; “Did you hear her love-sick words, almost incredible as they were? What things she uttered! How she wailed! How she reproached herself! That lecher has the better of me everywhere; I think the cut-purse must be a wizard too. Melite loves him, Leucippe loves him; would God that I might become Clitophon!” “No,” said Sosthenes, “you must not weaken in your task, my master: you must once more approach the girl yourself.
 Even if now she is in love with this damned spark, it is only that as long as she has known him alone, and has no experience of others, she sends her heart out to pasture on him; once you step into his place—you are a far more handsome figure than he is—she will utterly forget him. A new love makes an old passion wither away; a woman is best pleased with things present before her, and only remembers the absent as long as she has failed to find something new: when she takes a new lover, she wipes off the impression of the old from her heart.” When Thersander heard this exhortation, he roused himself; for words containing the prediction of success in love are efficacious in their power of persuasion: desire takes its own object as its ally, and so awakes the sentiment of hope. He therefore waited for a little while after Leucippe had finished her soliloquy, so that he might not seem to have been listening to it, and then, composing himself to an expression which he thought would make him more acceptable in her sight, went into the hut. At the sight of Leucippe, his heart burned up into fresh love: she seemed to him at that moment to have become more beautiful than ever. All night long—the whole time that he had been absent from her—he had been nursing the fire of his passion; and now, the sight of her adding fresh fuel to its flames, it suddenly burst out, and he was all but falling upon her and embracing her. But he mastered himself and sat down by her side, beginning to converse with her and stringing togetherweaken in your task, my master: you must once more approach the girl yourself. Even if now she is in love with this damned spark, it is only that as long as she has known him alone, and has no experience of others, she sends her heart out to pasture on him; once you step into his place—you are a far more handsome figure than he is—she will utterly forget him. A new love makes an old passion wither away; a woman is best pleased with things present before her, and only remembers the absent as long as she has failed to find something new: when she takes a new lover, she wipes off the impression of the old from her heart.” When Thersander heard this exhortation, he roused himself; for words containing the prediction of success in love are efficacious in their power of persuasion: desire takes its own object as its ally, and so awakes the sentiment of hope. He therefore waited for a little while after Leucippe had finished her soliloquy, so that he might not seem to have been listening to it, and then, composing himself to an expression which he thought would make him more acceptable in her sight, went into the hut. At the sight of Leucippe, his heart burned up into fresh love: she seemed to him at that moment to have become more beautiful than ever. All night long—the whole time that he had been absent from her—he had been nursing the fire of his passion; and now, the sight of her adding fresh fuel to its flames, it suddenly burst out, and he was all but falling upon her and embracing her. But he mastered himself and sat down by her side, beginning to converse with her and stringing together remarks with no particular meaning.
 This is characteristic of lovers, when they try to talk with the women they love; they put no sense into what they say, but, their whole heart fixed on the object of its love, they let their tongue prattle on without the guidance of reason. As he conversed with her and put his hand on her shoulder, he began to embrace her, making as though he would kiss her; but she, seeing the course which his hand was about to make, bent her head down and let it drop on her bosom; at which he did but encircle her neck the more, trying to compel her to lift up her face, while she in return still bent down and tried to avoid his kisses. Some time passing in this wrestling against the force of his hand, Thersander was overcome by love’s anger and strife: he put his left hand beneath her face, while with the right he took hold of her hair; and pulling her head backward with the one and pushing upward beneath her chin with the other, he made her lift up her head. When he presently desisted from the force he was employing, either because he had been successful in his object, or because he had been unsuccessful in it, or because he was tired, Leucippe exclaimed to him, “You are not acting as a free man or as one that is noble; you behave like Sosthenes; the man is worthy of his master. Stop now, and know that you can never attain your wishes, unless you become Clitophon.” At these words Thersander was utterly distracted; he loved, he was wroth. Anger and love are two flames: yes, anger possesses a second fire, asremarks with no particular meaning. This is characteristic of lovers, when they try to talk with the women they love; they put no sense into what they say, but, their whole heart fixed on the object of its love, they let their tongue prattle on without the guidance of reason. As he conversed with her and put his hand on her shoulder, he began to embrace her, making as though he would kiss her; but she, seeing the course which his hand was about to make, bent her head down and let it drop on her bosom; at which he did but encircle her neck the more, trying to compel her to lift up her face, while she in return still bent down and tried to avoid his kisses. Some time passing in this wrestling against the force of his hand, Thersander was overcome by love’s anger and strife: he put his left hand beneath her face, while with the right he took hold of her hair; and pulling her head backward with the one and pushing upward beneath her chin with the other, he made her lift up her head. When he presently desisted from the force he was employing, either because he had been successful in his object, or because he had been unsuccessful in it, or because he was tired, Leucippe exclaimed to him, “You are not acting as a free man or as one that is noble; you behave like Sosthenes; the man is worthy of his master. Stop now, and know that you can never attain your wishes, unless you become Clitophon.” At these words Thersander was utterly distracted; he loved, he was wroth. Anger and love are two flames: yes, anger possesses a second fire, as opposite as possible to the other in its nature, but of equal strength.
 The one stirs up to hatred, the other forces on to love; and near to each other are the sources of both; the one has its seat in the bile, the other flutters madly round the heart. When both these passions together attack a man, his soul becomes a balance between them, with fire in either of its scales; they fight as to which shall weigh down the balance, and generally love wins, if it attain the object of its desire; but if the beloved scorn it, it calls in anger to be its ally; like a true neighbour it responds to the call, and both combine together in making the flames burn more fiercely. But if once anger, associating with love, has driven it from its proper place and keeps it without, it is an implacable foe, and will not fight together with it as a friend with a view of accomplishing its desire, but rather keeps it bound as its desire’s serf; it will not allow it, even though it be anxious to do so, to come to terms with the beloved. Then love is overwhelmed by anger and sinks in its flood; and when it wishes to revert to its former power, it is no longer free, but is forced to hate the object of its affections. Anger, however, first froths up to its full and has complete fruition of its power; then it grows weary and begins to weaken from satiety, and when the weakening has once begun its power relaxes: thenopposite as possible to the other in its nature, but of equal strength. The one stirs up to hatred, the other forces on to love; and near to each other are the sources of both; the one has its seat in the bile, the other flutters madly round the heart. When both these passions together attack a man, his soul becomes a balance between them, with fire in either of its scales; they fight as to which shall weigh down the balance, and generally love wins, if it attain the object of its desire; but if the beloved scorn it, it calls in anger to be its ally; like a true neighbour it responds to the call, and both combine together in making the flames burn more fiercely. But if once anger, associating with love, has driven it from its proper place and keeps it without, it is an implacable foe, and will not fight together with it as a friend with a view of accomplishing its desire, but rather keeps it bound as its desire’s serf; it will not allow it, even though it be anxious to do so, to come to terms with the beloved. Then love is overwhelmed by anger and sinks in its flood; and when it wishes to revert to its former power, it is no longer free, but is forced to hate the object of its affections. Anger, however, first froths up to its full and has complete fruition of its power; then it grows weary and begins to weaken from satiety, and when the weakening has once begun its power relaxes: then love takes the offensive, puts desire into arms, and wins the mastery over anger which has already begun to doze.
 It sees the wrongs which it has done to those very dear to it in its moment of frenzy; it feels remorse, it expresses its sorrow to the beloved and issues a call to intimacy, promising to soften anger by the power of pleasure. If it gains the object of its desires, it becomes agreeable and gentle; but if it is once more rejected, it again takes refuge in anger, which is aroused from its slumbers and acts as it did before. Anger is the ally of love suffering under scorn. Thersander then, when he first hoped to be successful in his passion, was wholly Leucippe’s slave: but when he was disappointed of his hopes, he gave free rein to his anger. “Wretched slave,” he cried, striking her on the face, “miserable, love-sick girl; I heard all your ravings. Are you not delighted that I even speak to you? Do you not think it a great piece of good fortune to be able to kiss your master? No, instead of that, you give yourself airs and pretend that you are desperate. A harlot you must be, for it is an adulterer that you love. Since, then, you will not take me as a lover, you shall experience me as a master.” “Very good,” said Leucippe, “if you choose to play the tyrant, and I have to suffer your oppression; but you will never ravish me by violence. I call you to witness,” she said, turning to Sosthenes, “how I bear outrage; your treatment of me has been still worse.” Sosthenes, full of shame at being thus convicted of his wrong-doing, cried: “A good taste of the lash is what this trollop wants, and an experience of alllove takes the offensive, puts desire into arms, and wins the mastery over anger which has already begun to doze. It sees the wrongs which it has done to those very dear to it in its moment of frenzy; it feels remorse, it expresses its sorrow to the beloved and issues a call to intimacy, promising to soften anger by the power of pleasure. If it gains the object of its desires, it becomes agreeable and gentle; but if it is once more rejected, it again takes refuge in anger, which is aroused from its slumbers and acts as it did before. Anger is the ally of love suffering under scorn. Thersander then, when he first hoped to be successful in his passion, was wholly Leucippe’s slave: but when he was disappointed of his hopes, he gave free rein to his anger. “Wretched slave,” he cried, striking her on the face, “miserable, love-sick girl; I heard all your ravings. Are you not delighted that I even speak to you? Do you not think it a great piece of good fortune to be able to kiss your master? No, instead of that, you give yourself airs and pretend that you are desperate. A harlot you must be, for it is an adulterer that you love. Since, then, you will not take me as a lover, you shall experience me as a master.” “Very good,” said Leucippe, “if you choose to play the tyrant, and I have to suffer your oppression; but you will never ravish me by violence. I call you to witness,” she said, turning to Sosthenes, “how I bear outrage; your treatment of me has been still worse.” Sosthenes, full of shame at being thus convicted of his wrong-doing, cried: “A good taste of the lash is what this trollop wants, and an experience of all kinds of tortures, until she learns not to look down on her lord and master.
 ” “You had better listen to Sosthenes,” said Leucippe; “he gives you admirable advice. Set out your tortures, bring up the wheel. Here are my arms, stretch them out. Bring your scourges too: here is my back, smite upon it. Bring your fire; here is my body, burn it. Bring also the sword; here is my neck, pierce it. Feast your eyes with a new sight; one woman contends against all manner of tortures, and overcomes all her trials. Then do you dare to call Clitophon an adulterer when you are an adulterer yourself? Tell me, pray, have you no fear of your own patroness Artemis, that you would ravish a virgin in the virgin’s city? Queen, where are thy avenging arrows?” “Virgin indeed!” cried Thersander. “The ridiculous impudence of the baggage! You a virgin, who passed night after night among a gang of pirates! I suppose your pirates were eunuchs? Or was the pirates’ lair a Sunday-school? Or perhaps none of them had eyes?” “Virgin I am,” said Leucippe, “even after passing through Sosthenes’ hands; if you do not believe me, ask him. He was the real brigand to me: the others had more command over their passions than both of you, and none of them shewed the brutal lust that you shew. If you behave like this, here is the true pirates’ lair. Do you feel no shame in acting as the pirates never dared to act? You do not seem to realize that by this very shamelessnesskinds of tortures, until she learns not to look down on her lord and master.” “You had better listen to Sosthenes,” said Leucippe; “he gives you admirable advice. Set out your tortures, bring up the wheel. Here are my arms, stretch them out. Bring your scourges too: here is my back, smite upon it. Bring your fire; here is my body, burn it. Bring also the sword; here is my neck, pierce it. Feast your eyes with a new sight; one woman contends against all manner of tortures, and overcomes all her trials. Then do you dare to call Clitophon an adulterer when you are an adulterer yourself? Tell me, pray, have you no fear of your own patroness Artemis, that you would ravish a virgin in the virgin’s city? Queen, where are thy avenging arrows?” “Virgin indeed!” cried Thersander. “The ridiculous impudence of the baggage! You a virgin, who passed night after night among a gang of pirates! I suppose your pirates were eunuchs? Or was the pirates’ lair a Sunday-school? Or perhaps none of them had eyes?” “Virgin I am,” said Leucippe, “even after passing through Sosthenes’ hands; if you do not believe me, ask him. He was the real brigand to me: the others had more command over their passions than both of you, and none of them shewed the brutal lust that you shew. If you behave like this, here is the true pirates’ lair. Do you feel no shame in acting as the pirates never dared to act? You do not seem to realize that by this very shamelessness of yours, you are piling up the greater eulogies for me; if you kill me now in your mad passion, people will say; ‘Here is Leucippe, who remained a virgin after falling among buccaneers, who remained a virgin after her abduction by Chaereas, who remained a virgin after passing through the hands of Sosthenes!’ This would be but little; I shall have a still greater meed of praise; ‘She remained a virgin even after her encounter with Thersander, who is more lecherous than any robber; if he cannot gratify his lust, he kills its object!’ Take up then all your instruments of torture, and at once; bring out against me the scourges, the wheel, the fire, the sword, and let Sosthenes, your counsellor, take the field with you.
 I am defenceless, and alone, and a woman; but one shield I have, and that is my free soul, which cannot be subdued by the cutting of the lash, or the piercing of the sword, or the burning of the fire. That is a possession I will never surrender; no, not I: and burn as you will, you will find that there is no fire hot enough to consume it!”of yours, you are piling up the greater eulogies for me; if you kill me now in your mad passion, people will say; ‘Here is Leucippe, who remained a virgin after falling among buccaneers, who remained a virgin after her abduction by Chaereas, who remained a virgin after passing through the hands of Sosthenes!’ This would be but little; I shall have a still greater meed of praise; ‘She remained a virgin even after her encounter with Thersander, who is more lecherous than any robber; if he cannot gratify his lust, he kills its object!’ Take up then all your instruments of torture, and at once; bring out against me the scourges, the wheel, the fire, the sword, and let Sosthenes, your counsellor, take the field with you. I am defenceless, and alone, and a woman; but one shield I have, and that is my free soul, which cannot be subdued by the cutting of the lash, or the piercing of the sword, or the burning of the fire. That is a possession I will never surrender; no, not I: and burn as you will, you will find that there is no fire hot enough to consume it!” 1.
 At these words Thersander was utterly distracted: he felt grief, anger, and the need of taking further counsel; the first, for his insulting repulse; the second, for his ill-success in his desires; and the third, because he was still in love. His soul there fore torn every way, he made no reply to Leucippe, but rushed from the hut. Although he flung away in a passion, he then allowed his mind the leisure to try to escape from the grievous quandary in which he found himself: and, after consulting Sosthenes, he went to the chief gaoler and asked that I might be put out of the way by means of poison. He could not persuade him, because the gaoler was afraid of the people’s vengeance, a predecessor of his having been found guilty of a similar poisoning and put to death: so he made a second request, that he would put a second inmate, in the guise of another prisoner, into the cell where I was lying shackled, with a view to learning my whole story by means of confidences made to him. The gaoler agreed, and the man was sent: he had had full instructions from Thersander, and he was to relate to me a story most artfully composed about Leucippe, to the effect that she had been killed by the contrivance of Melite. At these words Thersander was utterly distracted: he felt grief, anger, and the need of taking further counsel; the first, for his insulting repulse; the second, for his ill-success in his desires; and the third, because he was still in love. His soul there fore torn every way, he made no reply to Leucippe, but rushed from the hut. Although he flung away in a passion, he then allowed his mind the leisure to try to escape from the grievous quandary in which he found himself: and, after consulting Sosthenes, he went to the chief gaoler and asked that I might be put out of the way by means of poison. He could not persuade him, because the gaoler was afraid of the people’s vengeance, a predecessor of his having been found guilty of a similar poisoning and put to death: so he made a second request, that he would put a second inmate, in the guise of another prisoner, into the cell where I was lying shackled, with a view to learning my whole story by means of confidences made to him. The gaoler agreed, and the man was sent: he had had full instructions from Thersander, and he was to relate to me a story most artfully composed about Leucippe, to the effect that she had been killed by the contrivance of Melite.
 The plot was composed by Thersander with this object: that if I were acquitted at my trial, I should believe that my loved one existed no more, and should therefore make no efforts to look for her; and Melite was associated with her murder, so that I might not marry Melite with the idea that she was still in love with me, thinking that Leucippe was dead, and so remain in the town and give constant anxiety to Thersander and prevent him from enjoying Leucippe at his ease, but should rather, as was natural, detest Melite as the cause of my darling’s murder, and leave Ephesus once and for all. So the fellow became my cell-mate and began to play the part that had been taught him. Heaving a simulated groan, “What kind of life,” he said, “am I to live in future? How can I direct my course so as to be out of danger? An honest life has by itself done me no good at all: evil fortune has overwhelmed me, and the waters of fate are closing over my head. I suppose I ought to have guessed the kind of man my fellow-traveller was, and the sort of things he had been doing.” This he murmured to himself and other phrases like it, trying to get a conversation begun with me, so that I should ask him what his trouble was. However, I paid little attention to what he said between his groans; but one of our fellow-prisoners (for in misfortune man is a creature always inquisitive to hear about another’s woes; community of suffering is something of a medicine for one’s own troubles), said to him: “What was the prank that Fortune played you? I dare say you met with a piece of bad luck, and did nothing wrong, if I may judge from my own misfortunes.” So saying, he related his own story, the reason why he was in prison.
 However, I paid no attention to any of his talk. This concluded, he asked the other for the story of his troubles: “Now do you,” said he, “relate what happened to you.” “I happened yesterday,” replied the other, “to be leaving the town on foot; I was proceeding on the road to Smyrna. When I had gone about half a mile, a young man from the country came up: he hailed me and accompanied me a little way.’ Where are you going?’ said he.’ To Smyrna,’ said I. ‘So am I,’ he said, ‘by good luck.’ So from there we went on together, and there passed between us the usual conversation of people journeying together, and when we arrived at an inn, we took our mid-day meal in one another’s company. Then four fellows came and sat down with us: they too pretended to eat, but they kept casting glances at us and nodding and winking at each other. I suspected that they entertained some bad purpose against us, but I could not understand what their signs and nods meant: my companion, however, began to turn pale and ate more and more slowly, and was finally overcome with a fit of trembling. When they saw this, the men jumped up, and, over-powering us, quickly tied us up with leather thongs: one of them struck my companion on the head, and he, as if he had experienced a thousand tortures, began to blurt out, though no one had questioned him: ‘Yes, I killed the girl, and took the bribe of a hundred pieces of gold from Melite, Thersander’s wife, which was the hire she gave me for the crime. Here is the money: why be the death of me and deprive yourselves of this chance of gain?’” I had not been attending previously, but when Ireason why he was in prison. However, I paid no attention to any of his talk. This concluded, he asked the other for the story of his troubles: “Now do you,” said he, “relate what happened to you.” “I happened yesterday,” replied the other, “to be leaving the town on foot; I was proceeding on the road to Smyrna. When I had gone about half a mile, a young man from the country came up: he hailed me and accompanied me a little way.’ Where are you going?’ said he.’ To Smyrna,’ said I. ‘So am I,’ he said, ‘by good luck.’ So from there we went on together, and there passed between us the usual conversation of people journeying together, and when we arrived at an inn, we took our mid-day meal in one another’s company. Then four fellows came and sat down with us: they too pretended to eat, but they kept casting glances at us and nodding and winking at each other. I suspected that they entertained some bad purpose against us, but I could not understand what their signs and nods meant: my companion, however, began to turn pale and ate more and more slowly, and was finally overcome with a fit of trembling. When they saw this, the men jumped up, and, over-powering us, quickly tied us up with leather thongs: one of them struck my companion on the head, and he, as if he had experienced a thousand tortures, began to blurt out, though no one had questioned him: ‘Yes, I killed the girl, and took the bribe of a hundred pieces of gold from Melite, Thersander’s wife, which was the hire she gave me for the crime. Here is the money: why be the death of me and deprive yourselves of this chance of gain?’” I had not been attending previously, but when I heard the names of Thersander and Melite, I started up, seeming to be stung to the heart by what he said as though by the sting of a gadfly: and I turned to him and said, “Who is Melite?” “Melite,” said he, “is a lady of the highest rank among those of this place.
 She was in love with a certain young man—a Tyrian, they say—and this Tyrian happened to be in love with a girl whom he afterwards found as a bought slave in Melite’s house. She, fired by jealousy, got hold of this girl by fraud and handed her over to the man who I just said travelled with me (to my bad luck), bidding him put her out of the way. He did indeed commit the crime: but the unhappy I, who had never even seen him or taken any part with him in word or deed, was now being dragged away with him as if I were an accomplice. Worse still, when we had gone a little way from the inn, those who had arrested us accepted his hundred pieces of gold and let him go, while they dragged me hither before the magistrate.” When I heard this trumped-up story of woe, I did not cry aloud nor weep; for I had neither voice nor tears in me. At once a great trembling took hold of all my body; my heart seemed turned to water, and I felt that there was but little of my spirit left in me. When I was slightly recovered from the paralysis occasioned by his story, I questioned him: “How did the hired murderer kill the girl, and what did he do with her body?” He, the sting once fairly planted and the work doneheard the names of Thersander and Melite, I started up, seeming to be stung to the heart by what he said as though by the sting of a gadfly: and I turned to him and said, “Who is Melite?” “Melite,” said he, “is a lady of the highest rank among those of this place. She was in love with a certain young man—a Tyrian, they say—and this Tyrian happened to be in love with a girl whom he afterwards found as a bought slave in Melite’s house. She, fired by jealousy, got hold of this girl by fraud and handed her over to the man who I just said travelled with me (to my bad luck), bidding him put her out of the way. He did indeed commit the crime: but the unhappy I, who had never even seen him or taken any part with him in word or deed, was now being dragged away with him as if I were an accomplice. Worse still, when we had gone a little way from the inn, those who had arrested us accepted his hundred pieces of gold and let him go, while they dragged me hither before the magistrate.” When I heard this trumped-up story of woe, I did not cry aloud nor weep; for I had neither voice nor tears in me. At once a great trembling took hold of all my body; my heart seemed turned to water, and I felt that there was but little of my spirit left in me. When I was slightly recovered from the paralysis occasioned by his story, I questioned him: “How did the hired murderer kill the girl, and what did he do with her body?” He, the sting once fairly planted and the work done for which he was sent to the prison, kept silence and answered me not a word.
 When I asked again, “Do you think,” said he, “that I was an accessory in the murder? All I heard from the miscreant was, that he had killed the girl: he did not tell me where or how.” Then came a flood of tears, making a vent for my grief through my eyes. It is like bodily blows—the weal does not come up at once; the bruise does not show directly after the stroke, but comes out suddenly after a little while. If a man gets a slash from a boars tusk he looks at once to find the wound but cannot find it, because it is deep-set, and, far down in the flesh, has slowly completed the incision made by the blow; but then suddenly a white streak appears, the precursor of the blood, which after a short interval wells to the surface and flows in abundance. Just in the same way, when the soul is smitten by the dart of grief, the spoken word directing the arrow, it receives the cutting wound: but the rapidity of the blow prevents the wound at first from opening, and keeps the tears far from the eyes. Tears may be considered the blood that flows from the wound of the soul: and after the biting tooth of grief has been for some time gnawing at the heart, only then does the soul’s wound begin to gape, and the portal of tears open in the eyes, and they gush out directly it is opened. So in my case; the news, attacking my soul like an arrow, had struck it to silence and shut off the fountfor which he was sent to the prison, kept silence and answered me not a word. When I asked again, “Do you think,” said he, “that I was an accessory in the murder? All I heard from the miscreant was, that he had killed the girl: he did not tell me where or how.” Then came a flood of tears, making a vent for my grief through my eyes. It is like bodily blows—the weal does not come up at once; the bruise does not show directly after the stroke, but comes out suddenly after a little while. If a man gets a slash from a boars tusk he looks at once to find the wound but cannot find it, because it is deep-set, and, far down in the flesh, has slowly completed the incision made by the blow; but then suddenly a white streak appears, the precursor of the blood, which after a short interval wells to the surface and flows in abundance. Just in the same way, when the soul is smitten by the dart of grief, the spoken word directing the arrow, it receives the cutting wound: but the rapidity of the blow prevents the wound at first from opening, and keeps the tears far from the eyes. Tears may be considered the blood that flows from the wound of the soul: and after the biting tooth of grief has been for some time gnawing at the heart, only then does the soul’s wound begin to gape, and the portal of tears open in the eyes, and they gush out directly it is opened. So in my case; the news, attacking my soul like an arrow, had struck it to silence and shut off the fount of tears; but afterwards, when it had Iain quiet for a time under its woe, they began to flow.
 I began therefore thus to commune with myself: “What god is it that has thus cheated me by a few moments of joy, and let me have just a glance at Leucippe only to form a new starting-point for miseries? I did not even satisfy my eyes—they were as far as my happiness extended—and take my fill even of gazing at her: all my happiness has been no more than that of a dream. Alas, Leucippe, how often have I seen you die! Have I ever been able to cease from bewailing you? Am I always to be mourning you, one death coming hot upon the heels of another? Yet on all the former occasions Fate was but playing a bad joke on me: this time she is jesting no longer. And now how wholly have I lost you! Each time then, when you falsely seemed to die, I had at least a little consolation; the first time, your whole corpse at least I thought I had, and the second time, all but your head, for me to bury: but now you have died a double death, life and body too. Two brigands’ bands did you escape, and now the contrivance of Melite, a very pirate-venture of her own, has been your destruction. Accursed and wicked I, that kissed your murderess time and again, that joined with her in a crime-stained embrace, and that imparted to her, before you, the joys of Aphrodite!” As I was thus making moan, in came Clinias, and I related the whole story to him, telling him at the same time that I was resolved on self-destruction. He did his best to comfort me: “Who can know,” he said, “but that she will come to life again? Has she not died more than once and more thanof tears; but afterwards, when it had Iain quiet for a time under its woe, they began to flow. I began therefore thus to commune with myself: “What god is it that has thus cheated me by a few moments of joy, and let me have just a glance at Leucippe only to form a new starting-point for miseries? I did not even satisfy my eyes—they were as far as my happiness extended—and take my fill even of gazing at her: all my happiness has been no more than that of a dream. Alas, Leucippe, how often have I seen you die! Have I ever been able to cease from bewailing you? Am I always to be mourning you, one death coming hot upon the heels of another? Yet on all the former occasions Fate was but playing a bad joke on me: this time she is jesting no longer. And now how wholly have I lost you! Each time then, when you falsely seemed to die, I had at least a little consolation; the first time, your whole corpse at least I thought I had, and the second time, all but your head, for me to bury: but now you have died a double death, life and body too. Two brigands’ bands did you escape, and now the contrivance of Melite, a very pirate-venture of her own, has been your destruction. Accursed and wicked I, that kissed your murderess time and again, that joined with her in a crime-stained embrace, and that imparted to her, before you, the joys of Aphrodite!” As I was thus making moan, in came Clinias, and I related the whole story to him, telling him at the same time that I was resolved on self-destruction. He did his best to comfort me: “Who can know,” he said, “but that she will come to life again? Has she not died more than once and more than once been restored to life? Why so rashly resolve to die? There is plenty of time to do so at leisure, when you know for certain that she is dead.
 ” “Your talk is folly,” said I: “how could one possibly learn anything with greater certainty than this? But I think I have found the best way to put an end to myself, and by it that accursed Melite too will not escape altogether without vengeance. Listen to my plan. I had resolved, as you know, if my case came into court, to put up a defence against the charge of adultery. But I have now determined to act in a precisely contrary manner—to confess the truth of the charge, and to add that Melite and I, deeply in love with one another, made the plot for the murder of Leucippe. Thus she too will be condemned, and I shall have a chance of getting rid of my life which I now but execrate.” “Speak not so,” said Clinias. “What? Could you bear to be condemned to death on the vilest of all charges, reputed a murderer and that the murderer of Leucippe?” “Nothing,” I answered, “is vile that hurts the enemy.” Shortly after we were engaged upon these discussions the chief gaoler removed the fellow who had been sent to tell the story of the sham murder, on the pretext that the magistrate had ordered him to be fetched to answer to the charges made against him. Clinias and Satyrus did their very best to dissuade me from my purpose, exhorting me to make no such statement as I had intended at my trial: but their efforts were of no avail. They therefore on the same day hired a lodging and took up their abode there, so as no longer to be living with Melite’s foster-brother.once been restored to life? Why so rashly resolve to die? There is plenty of time to do so at leisure, when you know for certain that she is dead.” “Your talk is folly,” said I: “how could one possibly learn anything with greater certainty than this? But I think I have found the best way to put an end to myself, and by it that accursed Melite too will not escape altogether without vengeance. Listen to my plan. I had resolved, as you know, if my case came into court, to put up a defence against the charge of adultery. But I have now determined to act in a precisely contrary manner—to confess the truth of the charge, and to add that Melite and I, deeply in love with one another, made the plot for the murder of Leucippe. Thus she too will be condemned, and I shall have a chance of getting rid of my life which I now but execrate.” “Speak not so,” said Clinias. “What? Could you bear to be condemned to death on the vilest of all charges, reputed a murderer and that the murderer of Leucippe?” “Nothing,” I answered, “is vile that hurts the enemy.” Shortly after we were engaged upon these discussions the chief gaoler removed the fellow who had been sent to tell the story of the sham murder, on the pretext that the magistrate had ordered him to be fetched to answer to the charges made against him. Clinias and Satyrus did their very best to dissuade me from my purpose, exhorting me to make no such statement as I had intended at my trial: but their efforts were of no avail. They therefore on the same day hired a lodging and took up their abode there, so as no longer to be living with Melite’s foster-brother.
 On the following day I was taken to the court. Thersander had made a great show in his appearance against me, and had an array of no less than ten counsel, and every preparation for her defence had been made with great care by Melite. When they had all finished their speeches, I asked to be allowed to speak too. “Every word,” said I, “that has been spoken by these lawyers, both those appearing for Thersander and for Melite, is pure nonsense. I will declare to you the whole true story. Long ago I was in love with a maiden; she was a Byzantine by birth, and her name was Leucippe. I believed that she was dead—she had been carried off by brigands in Egypt—and then fell in with Melite. A familiarity grew up between us, and from that country we came together hither, where we found Leucippe in the position of a slave belonging to Sosthenes, who was one of the bailiffs of Thersander’s country estates. How Sosthenes had obtained this free girl as a slave, and what were his relations with the brigands, I leave you to investigate. Now when Melite learned that I had found my former mistress, she was afraid that I should again become attached to her, and began to plot to put her out of the way. I fell in with her schemes—there is nothing that stops me from revealing the truth—because she promised to make me lord and master of all her substance. I therefore hired a fellow to commit the murder; the price of it was a hundred pieces of gold. After his crime, he escaped, and from that time nothing more has been heard of him; as for me, love soon took its revenge: I felt remorse, I bewailed my crime; I was in love with her and I still am. This is the reason that I have accused myself, that you may send me after her whom 1 love.
 I can bear life no longer—I who am a murderer and still in love with the maiden whom I slew.” At this speech of mine all in court were struck dumb with astonishment at the extraordinary turn affairs had taken, Melite most of all. Thersander’s advocates were already joyfully upraising a paean of triumph, while Melite’s questioned her as to the statements that had been made. At some she professed to be overcome with surprise and distress; some she denied, others she confessed openly and clearly; she said that she knew Leucippe, and admitted the truth of what I said, except as regards the murder; to such an extent that her counsel, on account of most of her statements corroborating mine, began to suspect that she might indeed be guilty, and were at a great loss what arguments to use in her defence. While the whole court was becoming a place of uproar, Clinias came forward. “Give me too leave to speak,” he said, “the case involves a man’s life.” Leave given, he began, his eyes full of tears: “Men of Ephesus, do not be too hasty to pass the death sentence upon a man who desires to die, the last remedy of the miserable; he has lied, accusing himself of the crimes committed by the guilty, in order that he may suffer the fate of the unfortunate. I will briefly relate to you the whole course of his troubles. He was in love with a maiden, as he told you; here his speech was true enough; and that brigands carried her off, and the part about Sosthenes, and the whole story that he told up till the murder, all has actually happened as he related.myself, that you may send me after her whom 1 love. I can bear life no longer—I who am a murderer and still in love with the maiden whom I slew.” At this speech of mine all in court were struck dumb with astonishment at the extraordinary turn affairs had taken, Melite most of all. Thersander’s advocates were already joyfully upraising a paean of triumph, while Melite’s questioned her as to the statements that had been made. At some she professed to be overcome with surprise and distress; some she denied, others she confessed openly and clearly; she said that she knew Leucippe, and admitted the truth of what I said, except as regards the murder; to such an extent that her counsel, on account of most of her statements corroborating mine, began to suspect that she might indeed be guilty, and were at a great loss what arguments to use in her defence. While the whole court was becoming a place of uproar, Clinias came forward. “Give me too leave to speak,” he said, “the case involves a man’s life.” Leave given, he began, his eyes full of tears: “Men of Ephesus, do not be too hasty to pass the death sentence upon a man who desires to die, the last remedy of the miserable; he has lied, accusing himself of the crimes committed by the guilty, in order that he may suffer the fate of the unfortunate. I will briefly relate to you the whole course of his troubles. He was in love with a maiden, as he told you; here his speech was true enough; and that brigands carried her off, and the part about Sosthenes, and the whole story that he told up till the murder, all has actually happened as he related.
 True it is that she has suddenly disappeared; I know not how, nor whether somebody has really murdered her, or whether she has been spirited away and is still alive; but this alone I do know, that Sosthenes was in love with her, that he afflicted her with divers torments, because of what he failed to get, and that he consorts with brigands as his friends. Clitophon is a man who here, thinking that his mistress is no more, no longer cares to live, and this is why he has falsely accused himself of murder. Why, he has himself confessed that he longs for death, and that for grief for a maiden lost; consider, then, if it is really probable that one individual should kill another, and then desire to be united in death with his victim, finding life intolerable from his sorrow for the victim’s death? Was there ever so affectionate a murderer, or hatred so akin to love? Believe him not, I implore you in the name of heaven, believe him not, and do not put to death a man who deserves pity rather than punishment. “Then, if he himself contrived the murder, as he says he did, let him describe the hireling he employed, let him produce the dead girl’s corpse; if, as in the present case, there exists neither murderer nor victim, was such a crime ever heard of before? Again, ‘I loved Melite,’ he says, ‘and therefore I killed Leucippe.’ How is it then that he accuses of murder Melite whom he loved, and is now desirous of dying for Leucippe whom he killed? Is it possible that anyone could thus hate the object of his love and love the object of his hatred? Nay, is it not rather far more probable that, if charged with the murder, he would have denied it, in order both to save her whom he loved and not to die for nothing on account of the victim? “Why then, you may ask, has he brought this accusation against Melite, if she committed no crime of this sort at all? I will explain this to you too, and I call heaven to witness that you should not think that I am arguing in order to traduce this lady’s character, but simply relating the story as it actually happened.
 Melite had fallen in love with the defendant, and the matter of marriage had been mentioned between them before the sea gave up its dead in the person of Thersander. Clitophon was not at all inclined to agree, but resisted the proposal stoutly; and at this moment finding his mistress, whom he believed dead, a slave in the power of Sosthenes and alive, he was still less inclined to have anything to do with Melite. She, before she found out that Sosthenes’ slave was beloved by him, had taken pity on her and released her from the chains with which Sosthenes had loaded her; she took her into her own house, and generally treated her in the way in which one would treat a free woman who had fallen into misfortune. When she did learn the truth, she sent her into the country to perform some service for her, and it is after this that she is said to have disappeared; Melite will acknowledge that this part of my story is true, as well as the two serving-maids whom she sent with her into the country. This single fact aroused a suspicion in Clitophon’s mind, with the idea that she might have put an end to Leucippe from jealousy; and his suspicion wassave her whom he loved and not to die for nothing on account of the victim? “Why then, you may ask, has he brought this accusation against Melite, if she committed no crime of this sort at all? I will explain this to you too, and I call heaven to witness that you should not think that I am arguing in order to traduce this lady’s character, but simply relating the story as it actually happened. Melite had fallen in love with the defendant, and the matter of marriage had been mentioned between them before the sea gave up its dead in the person of Thersander. Clitophon was not at all inclined to agree, but resisted the proposal stoutly; and at this moment finding his mistress, whom he believed dead, a slave in the power of Sosthenes and alive, he was still less inclined to have anything to do with Melite. She, before she found out that Sosthenes’ slave was beloved by him, had taken pity on her and released her from the chains with which Sosthenes had loaded her; she took her into her own house, and generally treated her in the way in which one would treat a free woman who had fallen into misfortune. When she did learn the truth, she sent her into the country to perform some service for her, and it is after this that she is said to have disappeared; Melite will acknowledge that this part of my story is true, as well as the two serving-maids whom she sent with her into the country. This single fact aroused a suspicion in Clitophon’s mind, with the idea that she might have put an end to Leucippe from jealousy; and his suspicion was confirmed by a second event which occurred in the prison, one which aroused bitterness in his heart against both himself and Melite.
 One of the prisoners was bewailing his lot, and began to relate how he had fallen in by the way with a man who was—though he did not know it—a murderer; that this fellow had murdered a woman for money: and he mentioned the names; it was Melite who had hired him to commit the crime, and Leucippe who had been done to death. Whether all this really happened, I do not know; you will be able to find out; you have the prisoner of whom I spoke, and the serving maids and Sosthenes are all in existence. Sosthenes can tell you whence he obtained Leucippe as a slave; the maids, how she disappeared; and the prisoner, who the hireling was. Until you have ascertained everyone of these particulars, it is not right, it is not consonant with your oaths, to condemn to death this wretched young man, accepting as evidence words spoken under the influence of madness; for he certainly has gone mad from grief.” When Clinias had finished this speech, the majority of those present were convinced by his argument; but Thersander’s counsel, and those of his friends who were present in court with him, shouted for the sentencing of the murderer, who had been brought by God’s providence to become his own accuser. Melite offered her serving-maidsconfirmed by a second event which occurred in the prison, one which aroused bitterness in his heart against both himself and Melite. One of the prisoners was bewailing his lot, and began to relate how he had fallen in by the way with a man who was—though he did not know it—a murderer; that this fellow had murdered a woman for money: and he mentioned the names; it was Melite who had hired him to commit the crime, and Leucippe who had been done to death. Whether all this really happened, I do not know; you will be able to find out; you have the prisoner of whom I spoke, and the serving maids and Sosthenes are all in existence. Sosthenes can tell you whence he obtained Leucippe as a slave; the maids, how she disappeared; and the prisoner, who the hireling was. Until you have ascertained everyone of these particulars, it is not right, it is not consonant with your oaths, to condemn to death this wretched young man, accepting as evidence words spoken under the influence of madness; for he certainly has gone mad from grief.” When Clinias had finished this speech, the majority of those present were convinced by his argument; but Thersander’s counsel, and those of his friends who were present in court with him, shouted for the sentencing of the murderer, who had been brought by God’s providence to become his own accuser. Melite offered her serving-maids to be questioned, and required Thersander to produce Sosthenes, for perhaps it was he who had murdered Leucippe; her advocates indeed laid great stress on this challenge which they put forward.
 Thersander was much alarmed at it, and privately sent one of his supporters to Sosthenes at his country place, advising him to make himself scarce at once, before the messengers sent for him could reach him; the envoy took horse with all speed, and when he had reached him, explained the danger that he was in; if he stayed where he was, he said, and were there arrested, he would certainly be put to the torture. Sosthenes happened to be at Leucippe’s hut, trying his blandishments upon her; when the messenger called out his name with much shouting and noise, he came out, heard the state of affairs, and was overcome by fear; and thinking that the police were already on his heels, he took horse and rode off at full gallop for Smyrna, while the other returned to Thersander. True it is, it seems, that fear paralyses the memory; at any rate Sosthenes, in his fright for his own skin, utterly forgot all his immediate duties in the momentary shock, and did not remember even to lock the doors of Leucippe’s hut. The whole tribe of slaves is greatly inclined to cowardice in any circumstances where there is the slightest room for fear.to be questioned, and required Thersander to produce Sosthenes, for perhaps it was he who had murdered Leucippe; her advocates indeed laid great stress on this challenge which they put forward. Thersander was much alarmed at it, and privately sent one of his supporters to Sosthenes at his country place, advising him to make himself scarce at once, before the messengers sent for him could reach him; the envoy took horse with all speed, and when he had reached him, explained the danger that he was in; if he stayed where he was, he said, and were there arrested, he would certainly be put to the torture. Sosthenes happened to be at Leucippe’s hut, trying his blandishments upon her; when the messenger called out his name with much shouting and noise, he came out, heard the state of affairs, and was overcome by fear; and thinking that the police were already on his heels, he took horse and rode off at full gallop for Smyrna, while the other returned to Thersander. True it is, it seems, that fear paralyses the memory; at any rate Sosthenes, in his fright for his own skin, utterly forgot all his immediate duties in the momentary shock, and did not remember even to lock the doors of Leucippe’s hut. The whole tribe of slaves is greatly inclined to cowardice in any circumstances where there is the slightest room for fear.
 While all this was happening, Thersander appeared after the first challenge in the lawsuit was made from Melite’s side in this way, and said: “We have surely had enough,” said he, “of the raving moonshine put forward by this fellow, whoever he is. I am really astonished at your callousness; you have caught a murderer in the act—a man’s own accusation of himself is even stronger than a capture , and yet you do not call upon the officer to lead him away to death, but sit there listening to this charlatan with his plausible acting and his plausible tears. I rather suspect that he too, being an accomplice in the murder, is afraid for his own skin, and so I see no need for the process of torturing slaves for further evidence in a case so clearly proved as this. Nay more, I fancy that they have committed a second murder; this Sosthenes, whom they call upon me to produce, has now been missing for more than two full days, and there is every ground for suspicion that his disappearance is due to their plotting; he it was that informed me of the adultery. So I think that they have made away with him, and now, certain that I cannot produce the fellow, have most craftily put forward the challenge for him. Now suppose for a moment that he were not dead, and had appeared here in court: whatever could be learned from his presence? If he once bought a certain girl? It is granted at once that he bought her. If Melite was at one time in possession of her? That too he acknowledges, by my lips. When he has given this evidence, Sosthenes is dismissed from the case; from this point begins my arraignment of Melite and Clitophon.
 What have you done with my slave, whom you took from me? For my slave she was, as Sosthenes had bought her, and if she were still alive and had not been murdered by them, she would still be my slave.” This last remark was interjected by Thersander with wicked cunning, so that if later on it were detected that Leucippe were still alive, he would be able to keep her in slavery to him. Then he went on: “Clitophon has acknowledged that he murdered her, and the verdict is settled on his case: Melite denies it; well, her serving-maids may be tortured to refute her denial. Supposing it is established that they received the girl from her, but never brought her back again, what is the conclusion? Why was she ever sent off into the country? To whom? Is not the whole affair perfectly clear, that the conspirators had suborned men to do away with her? About them, naturally enough, no information was given to the serving-maids—the greater the number of those privy to the scheme, the greater danger would it involve; the maids left her near the spot where the robber-band was lying in hiding, and it was so quite possible that they did not even see what happened. Then this fellow uttered some frantic nonsense about some prisoner, who is supposed to have spoken of the murder. Who is this prisoner, who has said nothing to the magistrate, but has related to Clitophon alone all the secrets of the murder, which he certainly would not have done if he had not recognised him as a participator in it? It is surely time that you ceased to pay any attention to these emptyfrom this point begins my arraignment of Melite and Clitophon. What have you done with my slave, whom you took from me? For my slave she was, as Sosthenes had bought her, and if she were still alive and had not been murdered by them, she would still be my slave.” This last remark was interjected by Thersander with wicked cunning, so that if later on it were detected that Leucippe were still alive, he would be able to keep her in slavery to him. Then he went on: “Clitophon has acknowledged that he murdered her, and the verdict is settled on his case: Melite denies it; well, her serving-maids may be tortured to refute her denial. Supposing it is established that they received the girl from her, but never brought her back again, what is the conclusion? Why was she ever sent off into the country? To whom? Is not the whole affair perfectly clear, that the conspirators had suborned men to do away with her? About them, naturally enough, no information was given to the serving-maids—the greater the number of those privy to the scheme, the greater danger would it involve; the maids left her near the spot where the robber-band was lying in hiding, and it was so quite possible that they did not even see what happened. Then this fellow uttered some frantic nonsense about some prisoner, who is supposed to have spoken of the murder. Who is this prisoner, who has said nothing to the magistrate, but has related to Clitophon alone all the secrets of the murder, which he certainly would not have done if he had not recognised him as a participator in it? It is surely time that you ceased to pay any attention to these empty babblings, making this serious business a matter of ridicule; can you think that this fellow would ever have brought this accusation against himself without the direct interposition of Providence?” 12.
 This was Thersander’s speech, and he followed it by his oath that he knew nothing of what had become of Sosthenes. The president of the judges then delivered his sentence: he was of the royal house, and it was his business to sit in capital charges; but he had, as the law provided, assessors chosen from the elders of the town, whom he had selected as experts in jurisprudence. After consultation with the assessors, his sentence was that I was to be put to death, in accordance with the law which provided that a murderer admitting his crime was to be condemned, but that as concerning Melite, there must be a second trial, the result of which would depend upon the evidence given by the serving-maids when put to the question; that Thersander was to make an additional affidavit in writing that he did not know what had become of Sosthenes, and that I, already judged guilty, was to be questioned under torture as to the connivance of Melite in my crime. I was therefore at once fettered, stripped naked of my clothes, and slung up on the cords, the attendants were some of them bringing the scourges, some the fire and wheel; Clinias was crying aloud and calling upon the gods for help, when Artemis’ bishop was descried approaching, crowned with bay. This is the indication that a sacred embassy to the goddess has arrived,babblings, making this serious business a matter of ridicule; can you think that this fellow would ever have brought this accusation against himself without the direct interposition of Providence?” This was Thersander’s speech, and he followed it by his oath that he knew nothing of what had become of Sosthenes. The president of the judges then delivered his sentence: he was of the royal house, and it was his business to sit in capital charges; but he had, as the law provided, assessors chosen from the elders of the town, whom he had selected as experts in jurisprudence. After consultation with the assessors, his sentence was that I was to be put to death, in accordance with the law which provided that a murderer admitting his crime was to be condemned, but that as concerning Melite, there must be a second trial, the result of which would depend upon the evidence given by the serving-maids when put to the question; that Thersander was to make an additional affidavit in writing that he did not know what had become of Sosthenes, and that I, already judged guilty, was to be questioned under torture as to the connivance of Melite in my crime. I was therefore at once fettered, stripped naked of my clothes, and slung up on the cords, the attendants were some of them bringing the scourges, some the fire and wheel; Clinias was crying aloud and calling upon the gods for help, when Artemis’ bishop was descried approaching, crowned with bay. This is the indication that a sacred embassy to the goddess has arrived, and when such an event occurs, there is bound to be a respite from all judicial punishments until the ambassadors have completed the sacrifice which they have come to perform: I was therefore temporarily released from my chains.
 Now the head of the sacred embassy was Sostratus, Leucippe’s father; for Artemis had appeared to the Byzantines during their war against the Thracians, and after their consequent victory, they decided that they must send her a sacrifice as a recognition of her aid during the war. Nay more, the goddess had appeared to Sostratus separately by night, and his dream foretold him that he would find his daughter and his brother’s son at Ephesus. To return to Leucippe; about the same time that all this was occurring, she perceived that the doors of her hut had been left open and that Sosthenes was not there: then she looked round to see if he were outside in front of the doors. As he was nowhere to be found, her accustomed courage and hope returned to her: she remembered that more than once she had been brought safely through, against all expectation, and in the matter of her present dangers she dared to hope that Fortune would once again come to her help. Now quite near to the country house was the temple of Artemis: so she ran thither, and there clutched hold with her hands of the shrine within it: the shrine was anciently forbidden to free matrons, but open to men and maidens: if any other woman entered it, death was the penalty of her intrusion, unless she were a slave with a legal complaint against her master: such a one was permitted to come as a suppliant to the goddess, while the magistrates decidedand when such an event occurs, there is bound to be a respite from all judicial punishments until the ambassadors have completed the sacrifice which they have come to perform: I was therefore temporarily released from my chains. Now the head of the sacred embassy was Sostratus, Leucippe’s father; for Artemis had appeared to the Byzantines during their war against the Thracians, and after their consequent victory, they decided that they must send her a sacrifice as a recognition of her aid during the war. Nay more, the goddess had appeared to Sostratus separately by night, and his dream foretold him that he would find his daughter and his brother’s son at Ephesus. To return to Leucippe; about the same time that all this was occurring, she perceived that the doors of her hut had been left open and that Sosthenes was not there: then she looked round to see if he were outside in front of the doors. As he was nowhere to be found, her accustomed courage and hope returned to her: she remembered that more than once she had been brought safely through, against all expectation, and in the matter of her present dangers she dared to hope that Fortune would once again come to her help. Now quite near to the country house was the temple of Artemis: so she ran thither, and there clutched hold with her hands of the shrine within it: the shrine was anciently forbidden to free matrons, but open to men and maidens: if any other woman entered it, death was the penalty of her intrusion, unless she were a slave with a legal complaint against her master: such a one was permitted to come as a suppliant to the goddess, while the magistrates decided the case between her and the master.
 If the master were found to have committed no offence against her, he used to take the serving-girl back, after taking an oath that he would bear no malice against her on account of her flight: but if sentence were given for the servant, then she stayed there as the goddess’s slave. Sostratus was just taking with him the bishop and coming to the law court to stop the execution of the sentence at the moment when Leucippe arrived at the temple, and she only missed meeting her father by a few moments. I was thus reprieved from the question, and the court had broken up: I was surrounded by a noisy mob, some expressing their pity, some calling upon the gods to punish me, others questioning me about my story, when Sostratus, who had stopped near me, recognized who I was; for, as I mentioned at the beginning of my story, he had once been in Tyre when the feast of Heracles was being celebrated, and had remained there for some days a considerable time before our flight: so that he at once realised from my appearance who I was, and he naturally expected to find us in Ephesus on account of his dream. He therefore came up to me, saying; “Here is Clitophon, but where is Leucippe?” As soon as I recognized him, I bent down my head, while the bystanders related to him the accusations I had brought against myself: at which he cried aloud, and buffeted his face, and then rushed at methe case between her and the master. If the master were found to have committed no offence against her, he used to take the serving-girl back, after taking an oath that he would bear no malice against her on account of her flight: but if sentence were given for the servant, then she stayed there as the goddess’s slave. Sostratus was just taking with him the bishop and coming to the law court to stop the execution of the sentence at the moment when Leucippe arrived at the temple, and she only missed meeting her father by a few moments. I was thus reprieved from the question, and the court had broken up: I was surrounded by a noisy mob, some expressing their pity, some calling upon the gods to punish me, others questioning me about my story, when Sostratus, who had stopped near me, recognized who I was; for, as I mentioned at the beginning of my story, he had once been in Tyre when the feast of Heracles was being celebrated, and had remained there for some days a considerable time before our flight: so that he at once realised from my appearance who I was, and he naturally expected to find us in Ephesus on account of his dream. He therefore came up to me, saying; “Here is Clitophon, but where is Leucippe?” As soon as I recognized him, I bent down my head, while the bystanders related to him the accusations I had brought against myself: at which he cried aloud, and buffeted his face, and then rushed at me and made as if he would almost tear out my eyes; I made no resistance and did not try to prevent him, but rather freely offered my face to his violence.
 At this Clinias came forward and addressed him, trying to restrain him: “What are you doing, Sir?” he said, “Why do you exhibit so wrong a passion against a man who loves Leucippe even better than you do? He has at any rate offered himself up to be put to death because he thought that the maiden had perished:” and he exhorted him with these and many other like words. He, however, went on lamenting, calling upon Artemis; “Was it for this, great queen, that thou didst bring me hither? Was the interpretation of the vision thou sentest me to be after this fashion? Yes, and I believed thy dream, and trusted to find my daughter here with thee. Now it is a fine gift that thou hast made me; I have found her murderer here in thy city.” When Clinias heard of the dream in which Artemis had appeared, he was overcome with joy; “Be of good cheer, venerable Sir;” he said, “Artemis is no liar: your Leucippe is alive; believe my powers of interpretation. Do you not see how she has delivered Clitophon too, who was actually strung up for execution, from the tortures that were awaiting him?” While he was thus speaking, one of the temple-keepers came running his fastest to the bishop, and cried, in the hearing of all, “A maiden, a foreigner, has taken sanctuary with Artemis.” At these words I was all in a flutter with hope; I opened my eyes and began to live once more. Clinias turned to Sostratus, saying; “You see, aged Sir, that my divinations are coming true;” and at once, speaking to the messenger, “Is she not fair?” “Never saw Iand made as if he would almost tear out my eyes; I made no resistance and did not try to prevent him, but rather freely offered my face to his violence. At this Clinias came forward and addressed him, trying to restrain him: “What are you doing, Sir?” he said, “Why do you exhibit so wrong a passion against a man who loves Leucippe even better than you do? He has at any rate offered himself up to be put to death because he thought that the maiden had perished:” and he exhorted him with these and many other like words. He, however, went on lamenting, calling upon Artemis; “Was it for this, great queen, that thou didst bring me hither? Was the interpretation of the vision thou sentest me to be after this fashion? Yes, and I believed thy dream, and trusted to find my daughter here with thee. Now it is a fine gift that thou hast made me; I have found her murderer here in thy city.” When Clinias heard of the dream in which Artemis had appeared, he was overcome with joy; “Be of good cheer, venerable Sir;” he said, “Artemis is no liar: your Leucippe is alive; believe my powers of interpretation. Do you not see how she has delivered Clitophon too, who was actually strung up for execution, from the tortures that were awaiting him?” While he was thus speaking, one of the temple-keepers came running his fastest to the bishop, and cried, in the hearing of all, “A maiden, a foreigner, has taken sanctuary with Artemis.” At these words I was all in a flutter with hope; I opened my eyes and began to live once more. Clinias turned to Sostratus, saying; “You see, aged Sir, that my divinations are coming true;” and at once, speaking to the messenger, “Is she not fair?” “Never saw I such another,” he replied, “save the goddess alone.
 ” At this I leaped up and shouted: “It must be Leucippe of whom you speak.” “Certainly,” said he; “that was the name by which she said that she was called, and that her country was Byzantium and her father Sostratus.” Then Clinias clapped his hands, shouting with triumph, while Sostratus fell to the ground for joy, and I leaped up on high, chains and all, and flew off to the temple like a bullet from the gun: my warders pursued me, thinking that I was running away, and called all those whom we met to catch me. But my feet had wings, and it was with the greatest difficulty that at length some of them stopped me in my mad course, and then my guards came up and set about beating me: to which I, now back in my old good spirits, resisted stoutly, and they began dragging me off to the prison. Meanwhile, up came Clinias and Sostratus, the former crying out; “Whither are you dragging this man? He is not guilty of the murder for which he was sentenced:” and Sostratus in his turn corroborated his story and said that he was the father of the girl who had been believed to have been murdered. The bystanders when they heard the whole story, blessed the name of Artemis; and making a ring round me, refused to allow me to be taken off to prison. The warders said that they did not possess the power of letting out a man who had been condemned to death; but presently the bishop, at the request of Sostratus, went bail that he would be responsiblesuch another,” he replied, “save the goddess alone.” At this I leaped up and shouted: “It must be Leucippe of whom you speak.” “Certainly,” said he; “that was the name by which she said that she was called, and that her country was Byzantium and her father Sostratus.” Then Clinias clapped his hands, shouting with triumph, while Sostratus fell to the ground for joy, and I leaped up on high, chains and all, and flew off to the temple like a bullet from the gun: my warders pursued me, thinking that I was running away, and called all those whom we met to catch me. But my feet had wings, and it was with the greatest difficulty that at length some of them stopped me in my mad course, and then my guards came up and set about beating me: to which I, now back in my old good spirits, resisted stoutly, and they began dragging me off to the prison. Meanwhile, up came Clinias and Sostratus, the former crying out; “Whither are you dragging this man? He is not guilty of the murder for which he was sentenced:” and Sostratus in his turn corroborated his story and said that he was the father of the girl who had been believed to have been murdered. The bystanders when they heard the whole story, blessed the name of Artemis; and making a ring round me, refused to allow me to be taken off to prison. The warders said that they did not possess the power of letting out a man who had been condemned to death; but presently the bishop, at the request of Sostratus, went bail that he would be responsible for the prisoner and produce him for public trial when the time came.
 Released thus then from my bonds, I hurried away with all possible speed to the temple, with Sostratus close at my heels, who probably felt the same kind of joy as my own. But, run a man never so swiftly, yet the winged tongue of speech gets to his destination before him: on this occasion again it anticipated us in our visit to Leucippe, relating the whole story to her, both Sostratus’ adventures and mine; and when she saw us, she rushed forth from the shrine, and while her arms were folded round her father’s neck, she kept her eyes fixed on me. There I stood, my shame for the way I had treated Sostratus restraining me—though all the time I was gazing steadfastly at her face—from falling into her arms; and so we greeted one another only with our eyes.for the prisoner and produce him for public trial when the time came. Released thus then from my bonds, I hurried away with all possible speed to the temple, with Sostratus close at my heels, who probably felt the same kind of joy as my own. But, run a man never so swiftly, yet the winged tongue of speech gets to his destination before him: on this occasion again it anticipated us in our visit to Leucippe, relating the whole story to her, both Sostratus’ adventures and mine; and when she saw us, she rushed forth from the shrine, and while her arms were folded round her father’s neck, she kept her eyes fixed on me. There I stood, my shame for the way I had treated Sostratus restraining me—though all the time I was gazing steadfastly at her face—from falling into her arms; and so we greeted one another only with our eyes.
 We were just about to sit down and talk of all this that had happened, when Thersander came rushing into the shrine, bringing some of his supporters as witnesses; and, addressing himself to the bishop, shouted out: “I testify before these witnesses that you have no right to release from his bonds and from the death-sentence a man who has been capitally condemned with all the solemnity of the law. And you have here a slave-girl of mine, a harlot who cannot be stopped from madness for men; see that you keep her safe for me.” At the words “slave and harlot,” I was grievously affected, and could not bear the wounds inflicted by his words; but while he was still speaking, “Triply slave yourself,” I interrupted, “and lecher, you run after harlots, while she is a free woman and a virgin, and well worthy of the goddess whom she serves” On hearing this, “Do you dare to revile me,” he cried, “gaol-bird and convicted felon?” and as he spoke, he gave me a violent blow on the face and followed it up with another, so that out flowed the streams of blood from my nostrils, as there was all the force of his fury behind the blow. He aimed a third, but taking less care in its direction, he accidentally struck his hand on my mouth, right on the teeth, and wounding his knuckles badly, uttered a cry of pain, and drew back his hand, though the wound made it quite hard to do so; thus my teeth avenged the violence offered to my nose, wounding the fingers that had given the blow, and the striking hand was repaid in its own coin.
 He could not repress a cry at the wound, but drew back his hand and so desisted from his assault: while I saw the accident that had happened to him, but pretended not to do so; but instead I made a tremendous fuss and outcry at the violent and overbearing treatment meted out to me, filling the temple with my cries. “Now whither are we to flee from violence? What is to be our refuge? To which of the gods are we to have recourse, if Artemis cannot protect us? We are assaulted in her very temple; we are beaten before the very sanctuary-veil. Such things as this happen only in deserted places where there are no witnesses at hand or even none of the human race; you shew your brutal violence in the sight of the gods themselves. Even evil-doers have a refuge in the safety of the sanctuary; but I, who have offended against no man, and had taken up the position of Artemis’ suppliant, am struck before her very altar, with the goddess, oh shame, looking on. These blows are aimed at Artemis herself: and the mad folly of her desecrator did not stop at mere blows; people are wounded, yes, wounded on the face, wounds such as one receives in wars and battles, and the holy pavement has been defiled with human blood. Is this a libation fit for the goddess? Are not these the offerings poured byhis hand on my mouth, right on the teeth, and wounding his knuckles badly, uttered a cry of pain, and drew back his hand, though the wound made it quite hard to do so; thus my teeth avenged the violence offered to my nose, wounding the fingers that had given the blow, and the striking hand was repaid in its own coin. He could not repress a cry at the wound, but drew back his hand and so desisted from his assault: while I saw the accident that had happened to him, but pretended not to do so; but instead I made a tremendous fuss and outcry at the violent and overbearing treatment meted out to me, filling the temple with my cries. “Now whither are we to flee from violence? What is to be our refuge? To which of the gods are we to have recourse, if Artemis cannot protect us? We are assaulted in her very temple; we are beaten before the very sanctuary-veil. Such things as this happen only in deserted places where there are no witnesses at hand or even none of the human race; you shew your brutal violence in the sight of the gods themselves. Even evil-doers have a refuge in the safety of the sanctuary; but I, who have offended against no man, and had taken up the position of Artemis’ suppliant, am struck before her very altar, with the goddess, oh shame, looking on. These blows are aimed at Artemis herself: and the mad folly of her desecrator did not stop at mere blows; people are wounded, yes, wounded on the face, wounds such as one receives in wars and battles, and the holy pavement has been defiled with human blood. Is this a libation fit for the goddess? Are not these the offerings poured by barbarians and the natives of Tauri, and is not this rather the Artemis worshipped by the Scythians? Only among them is the shrine drenched with blood after this fashion.
 You have converted Ionia into Scythia, Thersander, and here in Ephesus flows blood that should only flow at Tauri. Come, use your sword against me! But what need is there of the steel? Your hand has done the work of the sword. Yes, that murderous and bloody hand of yours has performed the work that is done at a human sacrifice.” As I shouted out these complaints, a great crowd came together of all those who were in the temple: and they began to abuse Thersander, as did the bishop himself, who said: “Are you not ashamed of acting thus, openly and in the temple?” At this, I took courage and added: “This is what I have suffered, Sirs, though I am a free man and a citizen of no mean city; this rascal conspired against my life, but Artemis saved me and proved him a trumper-up of false charges. Now I must go and wash my face outside; God forbid that the holy water of the temple should be polluted by the blood of violence.” At this, they dragged him away with some difficulty and induced him to leave the temple, but thus much he was able to say as he went; “Your case is already judged and finished, and it will not be long before you pay the penalty that is due; as for this prostitute, this sham virgin, she shall be tested by the ordeal of the pan-pipes.”barbarians and the natives of Tauri, and is not this rather the Artemis worshipped by the Scythians? Only among them is the shrine drenched with blood after this fashion. You have converted Ionia into Scythia, Thersander, and here in Ephesus flows blood that should only flow at Tauri. Come, use your sword against me! But what need is there of the steel? Your hand has done the work of the sword. Yes, that murderous and bloody hand of yours has performed the work that is done at a human sacrifice.” As I shouted out these complaints, a great crowd came together of all those who were in the temple: and they began to abuse Thersander, as did the bishop himself, who said: “Are you not ashamed of acting thus, openly and in the temple?” At this, I took courage and added: “This is what I have suffered, Sirs, though I am a free man and a citizen of no mean city; this rascal conspired against my life, but Artemis saved me and proved him a trumper-up of false charges. Now I must go and wash my face outside; God forbid that the holy water of the temple should be polluted by the blood of violence.” At this, they dragged him away with some difficulty and induced him to leave the temple, but thus much he was able to say as he went; “Your case is already judged and finished, and it will not be long before you pay the penalty that is due; as for this prostitute, this sham virgin, she shall be tested by the ordeal of the pan-pipes.” 4.
 At last he went, and I too went out and washed my face. It was then time for dinner, and the bishop most hospitably invited us to dine with him. I was unable to look Sostratus in the face, conscious of the way I had treated him: while he, observing the scratches round my eyes of which he had been the inflicter, was in return ashamed to face me; and Leucippe for the most part kept her eyes fixed on the ground; so that the whole dinner was one long shamefastness. However, as we began to drink more deep and Dionysus little by little dissolved our shyness (rightly is he called the father of freedom the bishop was the first to speak, addressing himself to Sostratus. “Will you not tell us, stranger,” said he, “the story in which you are all involved? Some of its ins and outs are likely to be not without interest, and tales of this sort are most suitable for the time when the wine is going round.” Sostratus was very glad to get hold of an excuse for breaking the ice. “My part of the story,” he said, “is very simple. Sostratus is my name, and I am a Byzantine by birth; the uncle of one of your guests, and the father of the other. As for all the rest, do you, my boy Clitophon, relate whatever the story is, and do not be shy about it. Even if I have gone through a great deal of trouble, the greater part of it is not your fault, but that of Fortune; and besides, the recital of trials past is more likely to raise the spirits of a man who is no longer sufferng under them than to depress him.” At this I related the whole story which developed from our flight from Tyre—our voyage, the shipwreck, our adventures in Egypt, the buccaneers, At last he went, and I too went out and washed my face. It was then time for dinner, and the bishop most hospitably invited us to dine with him. I was unable to look Sostratus in the face, conscious of the way I had treated him: while he, observing the scratches round my eyes of which he had been the inflicter, was in return ashamed to face me; and Leucippe for the most part kept her eyes fixed on the ground; so that the whole dinner was one long shamefastness. However, as we began to drink more deep and Dionysus little by little dissolved our shyness (rightly is he called the father of freedom the bishop was the first to speak, addressing himself to Sostratus. “Will you not tell us, stranger,” said he, “the story in which you are all involved? Some of its ins and outs are likely to be not without interest, and tales of this sort are most suitable for the time when the wine is going round.” Sostratus was very glad to get hold of an excuse for breaking the ice. “My part of the story,” he said, “is very simple. Sostratus is my name, and I am a Byzantine by birth; the uncle of one of your guests, and the father of the other. As for all the rest, do you, my boy Clitophon, relate whatever the story is, and do not be shy about it. Even if I have gone through a great deal of trouble, the greater part of it is not your fault, but that of Fortune; and besides, the recital of trials past is more likely to raise the spirits of a man who is no longer sufferng under them than to depress him.” At this I related the whole story which developed from our flight from Tyre—our voyage, the shipwreck, our adventures in Egypt, the buccaneers, the carrying away of Leucippe, the mock stomach used at the altar (Menelaus’ artful device), the general’s love and the remedy administered by Chaereas, how Leucippe was carried off by the pirates and the wound I received in the thigh during the fight with them, of which I showed them the scar.
 When I came to the part of the story in which Melite was concerned, I gave such a turn to the sequence of events that I made them appear greatly to the advantage of my continence, yet without any departure from the truth; I related the story of Melite’s love for me, my own chastity with regard to her—the long time during which she besought me to take pity on her, her ill-success in her prayers, her promises, her laments; I told all about the ship, our voyage to Ephesus, how we shared the same couch, and how (I swore by Artemis present before us) she rose from it as one woman would rise from another’s bed. Only one thing I omitted in all my adventures, and that was the somewhat delicate matter of my connexion with Melite after the events just mentioned; but I recounted my dinner with her, and how, later, I made the false accusation against myself, and I completed the story as far as the arrival of the sacred embassy. “These are my adventures,” said I, “but those of Leucippe have been more thrilling than mine. She has been bought and sold, she has been a slave, she has dug the ground, she has been robbed of the crowning glory of her hair; you can still see where her head was shaved”: and I then related all that had happened to her in detail. When I came to the part where she fell in with Sosthenes and Thersander, I made much more of her adventures than I had ofthe carrying away of Leucippe, the mock stomach used at the altar (Menelaus’ artful device), the general’s love and the remedy administered by Chaereas, how Leucippe was carried off by the pirates and the wound I received in the thigh during the fight with them, of which I showed them the scar. When I came to the part of the story in which Melite was concerned, I gave such a turn to the sequence of events that I made them appear greatly to the advantage of my continence, yet without any departure from the truth; I related the story of Melite’s love for me, my own chastity with regard to her—the long time during which she besought me to take pity on her, her ill-success in her prayers, her promises, her laments; I told all about the ship, our voyage to Ephesus, how we shared the same couch, and how (I swore by Artemis present before us) she rose from it as one woman would rise from another’s bed. Only one thing I omitted in all my adventures, and that was the somewhat delicate matter of my connexion with Melite after the events just mentioned; but I recounted my dinner with her, and how, later, I made the false accusation against myself, and I completed the story as far as the arrival of the sacred embassy. “These are my adventures,” said I, “but those of Leucippe have been more thrilling than mine. She has been bought and sold, she has been a slave, she has dug the ground, she has been robbed of the crowning glory of her hair; you can still see where her head was shaved”: and I then related all that had happened to her in detail. When I came to the part where she fell in with Sosthenes and Thersander, I made much more of her adventures than I had of my own, wishing, as a lover should, to give her the greatest possible credit while her father was listening; how she suffered bodily all manner of insult and violence, save one, and because of this one alone withstood all the others: “And in that respect, father,” I added, “she is still the same, up to the present day, as when you sent her away from Byzantium.
 Nor is it to be put down at all to my credit that after accomplishing this flight I abstained from the very object for which we had fled: but to hers, that she remained a virgin when surrounded by a gang of pirates, and overcame that greatest pirate of all; I mean Thersander, the shameless, brutal wretch. During our journey from Tyre we were abstemious, my father; it was love that drove us from our native land, and the flight was that of a lover and his mistress; but when we had once started we became no more than a brother and sister to each other. If there be any such thing as virginity among us men, then that I have preserved with respect to Leucippe up to the present moment, while, as for her, she has long been anxiously hoping for this temple of Artemis. Lady Aphrodite, be not wroth with us as though we had slighted thee; we would not that our marriage should take place without her father being present; now he is here, come thou also, and look kindly upon us.” As they heard this tale, the bishop listened agape with astonishment, full of surprise at all the details of the story; while Sostratus was shedding tears every time the relation dealt with the adventures of Leucippe. When I hadmy own, wishing, as a lover should, to give her the greatest possible credit while her father was listening; how she suffered bodily all manner of insult and violence, save one, and because of this one alone withstood all the others: “And in that respect, father,” I added, “she is still the same, up to the present day, as when you sent her away from Byzantium. Nor is it to be put down at all to my credit that after accomplishing this flight I abstained from the very object for which we had fled: but to hers, that she remained a virgin when surrounded by a gang of pirates, and overcame that greatest pirate of all; I mean Thersander, the shameless, brutal wretch. During our journey from Tyre we were abstemious, my father; it was love that drove us from our native land, and the flight was that of a lover and his mistress; but when we had once started we became no more than a brother and sister to each other. If there be any such thing as virginity among us men, then that I have preserved with respect to Leucippe up to the present moment, while, as for her, she has long been anxiously hoping for this temple of Artemis. Lady Aphrodite, be not wroth with us as though we had slighted thee; we would not that our marriage should take place without her father being present; now he is here, come thou also, and look kindly upon us.” As they heard this tale, the bishop listened agape with astonishment, full of surprise at all the details of the story; while Sostratus was shedding tears every time the relation dealt with the adventures of Leucippe. When I had at last made an end: “You have now both of you heard all that happened to us,” I added, “but there is one thing about which I in my turn should like to question you, good bishop.
 What is it that Thersander meant in his last threats against Leucippe, just as he was going away, when he mentioned the pan-pipes?” “That is a fair question,” he replied, u and as I know all about the pan-pipes, it is only right that I should adapt myself to your present wishes. I will make it clear to you as a return for the story you have just told. “You see this grove here behind the shrine. Within it is a grotto that may not be entered by any women except clean maids, and a little within its walls there hangs up a pan-pipes. If this instrument is found as a native institution among you of Byzantium, you will be well acquainted with that of which I speak, but if any of you are less familiar with music of this description, allow me to explain it to you and to tell you the whole story of Pan. The panpipes is in reality a set of pipes, and while each reed is a pipe, the whole group of reeds is equal to one pipe; they are fastened together in a row, one after the other, to form a single whole, and the instrument appears the same whether regarded from the back or the front. The reeds differ slightly from one another in length; the shortest is fixed at one end of the row, then comes that which is next above it in size, then, third, the one which is as much longer than the second as the second is longer than the first, and so the whole of them in due order, going up in equal gradationsat last made an end: “You have now both of you heard all that happened to us,” I added, “but there is one thing about which I in my turn should like to question you, good bishop. What is it that Thersander meant in his last threats against Leucippe, just as he was going away, when he mentioned the pan-pipes?” “That is a fair question,” he replied, u and as I know all about the pan-pipes, it is only right that I should adapt myself to your present wishes. I will make it clear to you as a return for the story you have just told. “You see this grove here behind the shrine. Within it is a grotto that may not be entered by any women except clean maids, and a little within its walls there hangs up a pan-pipes. If this instrument is found as a native institution among you of Byzantium, you will be well acquainted with that of which I speak, but if any of you are less familiar with music of this description, allow me to explain it to you and to tell you the whole story of Pan. The panpipes is in reality a set of pipes, and while each reed is a pipe, the whole group of reeds is equal to one pipe; they are fastened together in a row, one after the other, to form a single whole, and the instrument appears the same whether regarded from the back or the front. The reeds differ slightly from one another in length; the shortest is fixed at one end of the row, then comes that which is next above it in size, then, third, the one which is as much longer than the second as the second is longer than the first, and so the whole of them in due order, going up in equal gradations from the first, and the innermost is (exactly) the middle by reason of the entire number being odd.
 The reason for this arrangement is to be found in the intervals of the scale: that which gives the highest note is at the top, and the note descends with the length of the reed, so that the two extremities are occupied by the pipes which are musically furthest apart; while, as for the intervals between these extremities, each reed is a note below its neighbour until it comes to the deepest of all at the far end. The sounds which Athene’s pipe makes within, the panpipes makes at the ends of the reeds, but whereas in the former the note is governed by the movement of the fingers over the holes, in the latter case the performer’s lips replace the office of the fingers. With the pipe, the performer stops all the holes but one, through which the breath escapes; but with the panpipes all the rest of the reeds are left untouched, and the lips are applied to one alone, the one which is to speak, and thence moves from one reed to another as the necessities of the tune indicate, so that the mouth may be said to dance along the pipes. Now originally the pan-pipes was neither pipe nor reed, but a maiden so fair that one would judge her worthy of a place among the gods. Pan was chasing her, a chase inspired by love, and in her flight she entered a thick wood; he, close on her heels,from the first, and the innermost is (exactly) the middle by reason of the entire number being odd. The reason for this arrangement is to be found in the intervals of the scale: that which gives the highest note is at the top, and the note descends with the length of the reed, so that the two extremities are occupied by the pipes which are musically furthest apart; while, as for the intervals between these extremities, each reed is a note below its neighbour until it comes to the deepest of all at the far end. The sounds which Athene’s pipe makes within, the panpipes makes at the ends of the reeds, but whereas in the former the note is governed by the movement of the fingers over the holes, in the latter case the performer’s lips replace the office of the fingers. With the pipe, the performer stops all the holes but one, through which the breath escapes; but with the panpipes all the rest of the reeds are left untouched, and the lips are applied to one alone, the one which is to speak, and thence moves from one reed to another as the necessities of the tune indicate, so that the mouth may be said to dance along the pipes. Now originally the pan-pipes was neither pipe nor reed, but a maiden so fair that one would judge her worthy of a place among the gods. Pan was chasing her, a chase inspired by love, and in her flight she entered a thick wood; he, close on her heels, was just stretching out his hand to catch her.
 He thought that his chase had been successful, and that he was grasping her hair: but his hand only clutched a bunch of reeds; she, it is said, had sunk into the ground, which bore a clump of reeds in her place. Pan, in a passion, cut away the reeds, thinking that they were hiding his beloved from him: but when, after a search lasting some time, he was unable to find her, he realised that she had been transformed into the reeds and regretted his action, thinking that he had actually cut down the object of his love. So he collected the fragments of reed as though they had been the maiden’s limbs and put them together as though to form a single body: and then, holding the pieces in his hands, kissed them, as though they had been her wounds. As he put his lips to them he groaned from love, and breathed down upon the reeds while he kissed them; and his breath, pouring down through the holes in them, gave musical notes, and the pan-pipes found its voice. So it is said that Pan there hung up the instrument, shutting it up in a cave, and that it was his custom to resort there often and play on the pipes. Some time after he made a gift of the whole spot to Artemis, making a compact with her that it should be entered by no woman no longer a maid. If therefore any girl is accused of being of doubtful virginity, she is sent by public decree to the door of the grotto, and the panpipes decides the ordeal for her; she goes in, clad in the proper dress, and the doors are closed behind her. If she is in reality a virgin, a clear and divine note is heard, either because there is some breeze in the place which enters the pipes and makes a musicalwas just stretching out his hand to catch her. He thought that his chase had been successful, and that he was grasping her hair: but his hand only clutched a bunch of reeds; she, it is said, had sunk into the ground, which bore a clump of reeds in her place. Pan, in a passion, cut away the reeds, thinking that they were hiding his beloved from him: but when, after a search lasting some time, he was unable to find her, he realised that she had been transformed into the reeds and regretted his action, thinking that he had actually cut down the object of his love. So he collected the fragments of reed as though they had been the maiden’s limbs and put them together as though to form a single body: and then, holding the pieces in his hands, kissed them, as though they had been her wounds. As he put his lips to them he groaned from love, and breathed down upon the reeds while he kissed them; and his breath, pouring down through the holes in them, gave musical notes, and the pan-pipes found its voice. So it is said that Pan there hung up the instrument, shutting it up in a cave, and that it was his custom to resort there often and play on the pipes. Some time after he made a gift of the whole spot to Artemis, making a compact with her that it should be entered by no woman no longer a maid. If therefore any girl is accused of being of doubtful virginity, she is sent by public decree to the door of the grotto, and the panpipes decides the ordeal for her; she goes in, clad in the proper dress, and the doors are closed behind her. If she is in reality a virgin, a clear and divine note is heard, either because there is some breeze in the place which enters the pipes and makes a musical sound, or possibly because it is Pan himself that is piping: and after a short time the doors of the grotto open of their own accord, and out comes the virgin with a wreath of the foliage of the pine upon her head.
 But if she has lied about her virginity, the pan-pipes is silent, and a groan comes forth from the cave instead of a musical sound; the people go away and leave the woman inside. On the third day after, the virgin priestess of the spot comes and finds the pan-pipes lying on the ground, but there is no trace of the woman. It is advisable therefore that you should take most careful thought as to the position that you are in, and be prudent. If she is a virgin, as I hope and think, go on light-heartedly and find the pan-pipes in your favour, for there is no instance of their giving a false decision; but if not, for you know that in the various trials to which she has been subject, it is possible that she, all against her will—” But Leucippe would not let the bishop finish his sentence. “I am quite determined,” she broke in; “say nothing more. I am ready to go into the grotto of the pan-pipes and to be shut up there even without any legal challenge.” “Good news,” said the bishop, “and I congratulate you on your discretion and your good fortune.” It was by this time the evening, and we each of us retired to bed according as the bishop had made disposition for us: Clinias had not dined with us, as we did not wish tosound, or possibly because it is Pan himself that is piping: and after a short time the doors of the grotto open of their own accord, and out comes the virgin with a wreath of the foliage of the pine upon her head. But if she has lied about her virginity, the pan-pipes is silent, and a groan comes forth from the cave instead of a musical sound; the people go away and leave the woman inside. On the third day after, the virgin priestess of the spot comes and finds the pan-pipes lying on the ground, but there is no trace of the woman. It is advisable therefore that you should take most careful thought as to the position that you are in, and be prudent. If she is a virgin, as I hope and think, go on light-heartedly and find the pan-pipes in your favour, for there is no instance of their giving a false decision; but if not, for you know that in the various trials to which she has been subject, it is possible that she, all against her will—” But Leucippe would not let the bishop finish his sentence. “I am quite determined,” she broke in; “say nothing more. I am ready to go into the grotto of the pan-pipes and to be shut up there even without any legal challenge.” “Good news,” said the bishop, “and I congratulate you on your discretion and your good fortune.” It was by this time the evening, and we each of us retired to bed according as the bishop had made disposition for us: Clinias had not dined with us, as we did not wish to seem to impose on the hospitality of our good host, but had stayed in the same lodging where he had been the day before.
 I should say that 1 had noticed that Sostratus shewed some slight signs of uneasiness during the story about the pan-pipes; he was evidently afraid that we had somewhat exaggerated Leucippe’s virginity out of respect to his presence; I therefore gave Leucippe an imperceptible sign that she should relieve her father’s anxiety, as she would obviously know best how to convince him; from the readiness with which she understood my hint, I rather think that she must have had the same suspicion about him, so that she quickly understood me and even before my sign she had been thinking of the most seemly way to make his assurance doubly sure. When therefore she was on the point of retiring to bed, she kissed her father good-night, and said to him in a low voice: “Courage, father, as far as I am concerned; and believe our story. I swear to you by Artemis that neither of us concealed the truth in any detail.” On the following day Sostratus and the bishop went about the business of the sacred embassy, and the sacrifices were handsomely performed, the members of the council being present and assisting at the service. Many were the blessings and hymns with which the goddess was invoked, when Thersander, who had also put in an appearance, went up to the presiding officer, saying: “I request you to put down my case for to-morrow; some persons have taken it upon themselves to release the prisoner whom you condemned yesterday, and Sosthenes is nowhere to be found.” The case had therefore been put down for the following day, and we were making the most elaborate preparations for our part in it.seem to impose on the hospitality of our good host, but had stayed in the same lodging where he had been the day before. I should say that 1 had noticed that Sostratus shewed some slight signs of uneasiness during the story about the pan-pipes; he was evidently afraid that we had somewhat exaggerated Leucippe’s virginity out of respect to his presence; I therefore gave Leucippe an imperceptible sign that she should relieve her father’s anxiety, as she would obviously know best how to convince him; from the readiness with which she understood my hint, I rather think that she must have had the same suspicion about him, so that she quickly understood me and even before my sign she had been thinking of the most seemly way to make his assurance doubly sure. When therefore she was on the point of retiring to bed, she kissed her father good-night, and said to him in a low voice: “Courage, father, as far as I am concerned; and believe our story. I swear to you by Artemis that neither of us concealed the truth in any detail.” On the following day Sostratus and the bishop went about the business of the sacred embassy, and the sacrifices were handsomely performed, the members of the council being present and assisting at the service. Many were the blessings and hymns with which the goddess was invoked, when Thersander, who had also put in an appearance, went up to the presiding officer, saying: “I request you to put down my case for to-morrow; some persons have taken it upon themselves to release the prisoner whom you condemned yesterday, and Sosthenes is nowhere to be found.” The case had therefore been put down for the following day, and we were making the most elaborate preparations for our part in it.
 The appointed time having come, Thersander began, as follows. “I know not where to begin my argument, and with which to begin; against which to bring my accusation first, and which second. Crime has been piled on crime, by different parties, each as heinous as the rest, and these crimes are but loosely connected with one another; and there are some as well on which I shall hardly be able to touch during my indictment. Since the heart rules the head, I am afraid my speech will be too incoherent to comprehend them all; before I finish one my tongue will go on to another; my anxiety to proceed to some point on which I have not yet dwelt will blunt the general effect of the whole sum of what I have previously said. When adulterers murder other people’s servants, when murderers commit adultery with other people’s wives, when whoremongers desecrate sacred embassies, when whores pollute our most sacred temples, when a person is found to fix the day of trials between slave-girls and their masters, is there any further excess of crime that can be committed beyond the welter of contempt for the law, adultery, impiety and blood-guiltiness? “You condemned a prisoner to death, on what charges it matters not now, and sent him in chains to prison to be kept there until his execution: and now here he stands before you; instead of his fetters he is wearing a white robe, and the prisoner is standing in the ranks of those who are free. He will have the impudence, perhaps, to lift up his voice and bring some cavilling, sophisticated accusation against me—rather will it be against you and the vote you gave.
 Read, usher, the decree pronounced by the presiding judges and their assessors. \[.\] You hear how you decided, and the verdict brought at my suit against this fellow. The vote was that Clitophon was to die. Where then is the public executioner? Let him arrest the prisoner and lead him away to death. Quick, give him the hemlock. He is already dead in the eyes of the law; he is a condemned felon whose date of execution is overdue. “And now, most reverend and worthy bishop, what have you to say? In what part of the divine law is it written that, when men are condemned by the government and its executive officers and given over for death or chains, you should rescue them from their sentence and have their chains struck off them, arrogating to yourself higher powers than those of presiding judges and courts of law? Come down from the bench, my Lord Chief, and leave your position and the court in his favour; you have no longer power over anybody; it is not within your province to pass sentence on rascals; all your decrees are reversed to-day. Nay, good bishop, why stand among us as though you were one of the common herd? Go up, and take your seat on his Lordship’s bench, and be our judge for the future—or rather, just express your sweet will and pleasure, like an autocrat; it is not worth while having any law or precedent of the court read to you. Better still, claim a position above mankind altogether; have worship paid to you along with Artemis, for it is herwill have the impudence, perhaps, to lift up his voice and bring some cavilling, sophisticated accusation against me—rather will it be against you and the vote you gave. Read, usher, the decree pronounced by the presiding judges and their assessors. \[.\] You hear how you decided, and the verdict brought at my suit against this fellow. The vote was that Clitophon was to die. Where then is the public executioner? Let him arrest the prisoner and lead him away to death. Quick, give him the hemlock. He is already dead in the eyes of the law; he is a condemned felon whose date of execution is overdue. “And now, most reverend and worthy bishop, what have you to say? In what part of the divine law is it written that, when men are condemned by the government and its executive officers and given over for death or chains, you should rescue them from their sentence and have their chains struck off them, arrogating to yourself higher powers than those of presiding judges and courts of law? Come down from the bench, my Lord Chief, and leave your position and the court in his favour; you have no longer power over anybody; it is not within your province to pass sentence on rascals; all your decrees are reversed to-day. Nay, good bishop, why stand among us as though you were one of the common herd? Go up, and take your seat on his Lordship’s bench, and be our judge for the future—or rather, just express your sweet will and pleasure, like an autocrat; it is not worth while having any law or precedent of the court read to you. Better still, claim a position above mankind altogether; have worship paid to you along with Artemis, for it is her honour that you have usurped.
 She alone has had the power, until now, of affording an asylum to those who fly to her for help (and that only before the court has pronounced its verdict; the goddess has never loosed a criminal from his chains or rescued a condemned felon from his deserved fate; her altars are for the unfortunate, not for the guilty), but now you take it upon yourself to strike the shackles from the prisoner and acquit the condemned, thus setting yourself up above the goddess. Who has ever lived in the temple as if it were a prison? Yes, there was a murderer and an adulterer in the church of that pure goddess; alack, alack, an adulterer in the virgin-shrine! And with him was a woman of the lightest character, a slave who had run away from her master: her too, as I myself saw, you took in; you allowed them to share your hearth and your table; and I should not be surprised to hear, my lord bishop, that you shared their bed as well when you turned the temple into a common lodging. Yes, the church of Artemis is become a bawdy-house—a whore’s bedchamber; they would have been ashamed of the goings-on there in the commonest brothel. My case against these two men therefore stands together; I ask that the one may be punished for his presumption, and that you will order the other to be handed over to suffer the punishment to which he has been condemned. “My second charge is against Melite, for adultery; and I shall not have to speak at great length against her, as it has been already resolved that the enquiry shall be conducted by putting her serving-maids to the question. I therefore claim them for this purpose; if, under the torture, they deny that theyhonour that you have usurped. She alone has had the power, until now, of affording an asylum to those who fly to her for help (and that only before the court has pronounced its verdict; the goddess has never loosed a criminal from his chains or rescued a condemned felon from his deserved fate; her altars are for the unfortunate, not for the guilty), but now you take it upon yourself to strike the shackles from the prisoner and acquit the condemned, thus setting yourself up above the goddess. Who has ever lived in the temple as if it were a prison? Yes, there was a murderer and an adulterer in the church of that pure goddess; alack, alack, an adulterer in the virgin-shrine! And with him was a woman of the lightest character, a slave who had run away from her master: her too, as I myself saw, you took in; you allowed them to share your hearth and your table; and I should not be surprised to hear, my lord bishop, that you shared their bed as well when you turned the temple into a common lodging. Yes, the church of Artemis is become a bawdy-house—a whore’s bedchamber; they would have been ashamed of the goings-on there in the commonest brothel. My case against these two men therefore stands together; I ask that the one may be punished for his presumption, and that you will order the other to be handed over to suffer the punishment to which he has been condemned. “My second charge is against Melite, for adultery; and I shall not have to speak at great length against her, as it has been already resolved that the enquiry shall be conducted by putting her serving-maids to the question. I therefore claim them for this purpose; if, under the torture, they deny that they knew that this gaol-bird kept company with her for a long time, and actually held a husband’s place, not a mere gallant’s, in my house, then I will retract all charges against her.
 But if the contrary proves to be the truth, I claim that, as the law directs, she must lose her dowry, which then becomes my property, and that her paramour must suffer the punishment meted out to adulterers; which is death. So that for whichever crime he suffers, adultery or murder (as he is clearly guilty of both), he will escape his due while he pays the penalty of his crime; whichever death he dies he will avoid the other which he ought to undergo. The third part of my charge is against my slave-girl and this hoary impostor who sets out to be her father; but I will keep that till later on, after you have given your verdict against these others.” With these words he ended his speech. The bishop then came forward. He was no poor hand at speaking, and as good at quip and gibe as the plays of Aristophanes, and he began his speech with much humour, touching in a jesting vein on Thersander’s own lecherous depravity. “This filthy abuse,” he cried, “in the presence of the goddess, of those who have led respectable lives, is a sign of unclean lips! This fellow’s tongue is full of wickedness in more ways than one. When he was a boy he consorted with many men of standing, and indeed on this he spent all the period of his youthfulknew that this gaol-bird kept company with her for a long time, and actually held a husband’s place, not a mere gallant’s, in my house, then I will retract all charges against her. But if the contrary proves to be the truth, I claim that, as the law directs, she must lose her dowry, which then becomes my property, and that her paramour must suffer the punishment meted out to adulterers; which is death. So that for whichever crime he suffers, adultery or murder (as he is clearly guilty of both), he will escape his due while he pays the penalty of his crime; whichever death he dies he will avoid the other which he ought to undergo. The third part of my charge is against my slave-girl and this hoary impostor who sets out to be her father; but I will keep that till later on, after you have given your verdict against these others.” With these words he ended his speech. The bishop then came forward. He was no poor hand at speaking, and as good at quip and gibe as the plays of Aristophanes, and he began his speech with much humour, touching in a jesting vein on Thersander’s own lecherous depravity. “This filthy abuse,” he cried, “in the presence of the goddess, of those who have led respectable lives, is a sign of unclean lips! This fellow’s tongue is full of wickedness in more ways than one. When he was a boy he consorted with many men of standing, and indeed on this he spent all the period of his youthful bloom: he put on a look of high seriousness, and counterfeited discretion, making himself out to be passionately devoted to the training in the way he should go, and always submitting and subjecting himself to those who made it their business to be his masters.
 Yes, and he left his father’s house and hired a little out-of-the-way hovel, where he took up his abode: and there he did much joint work and was also always ready to receive and associate with himself those who were able to give him what he wanted. He was certain that in this manner he was developing the powers of his soul: \[but all was in a reality a cloak for his wickedness:\] and then we used to see him in the public places of exercise too; how carefully he would anoint his body for the fray, with what agility he would bestride the spur, and how in the wrestle he never shrank from embrace of youths who were almost men; such was the training to which he devoted his body. All this was when he was in the flower of his early years: when he came to associate with men, he unveiled all that had previously been hidden. The rest of his body became no longer suitable for the pursuits in which it had formerly been engaged, but he sharpened his tongue to wickedness and employed his lips for the grossest purposes: there was none whom he would not use it to defile, his shamelessness appearing openly on his countenance, and he has even gone so far as publicly and brutally to revile one who has been honoured by you with the priestly office. If I had happened to live anywhere else, and had not passed all my days among you. I might have foundbloom: he put on a look of high seriousness, and counterfeited discretion, making himself out to be passionately devoted to the training in the way he should go, and always submitting and subjecting himself to those who made it their business to be his masters. Yes, and he left his father’s house and hired a little out-of-the-way hovel, where he took up his abode: and there he did much joint work and was also always ready to receive and associate with himself those who were able to give him what he wanted. He was certain that in this manner he was developing the powers of his soul: \[but all was in a reality a cloak for his wickedness:\] and then we used to see him in the public places of exercise too; how carefully he would anoint his body for the fray, with what agility he would bestride the spur, and how in the wrestle he never shrank from embrace of youths who were almost men; such was the training to which he devoted his body. All this was when he was in the flower of his early years: when he came to associate with men, he unveiled all that had previously been hidden. The rest of his body became no longer suitable for the pursuits in which it had formerly been engaged, but he sharpened his tongue to wickedness and employed his lips for the grossest purposes: there was none whom he would not use it to defile, his shamelessness appearing openly on his countenance, and he has even gone so far as publicly and brutally to revile one who has been honoured by you with the priestly office. If I had happened to live anywhere else, and had not passed all my days among you. I might have found it necessary to give you an account of myself and of my life: but since you know how remote has been my way of life from the slanders which he has uttered against me, let me discourse to you at greater length upon the actual charges which he brings against me.
 ‘You have set free,’ he says, ‘one condemned to death’: and on this ground he has called me the hardest names, terming me ‘autocrat’ and all the other grandiloquent nonsense which he was able to trump up against me. But the autocrat is one who in this case has done his best to save not merely those who have been falsely charged, but persons who have done no wrong whatever, and who have been condemned neither by the government nor by the voice of the people. Tell me, Thersander, what was the law by whose authority you originally threw this young man, a foreigner, into gaol? Which of the presiding justices had condemned him? Which court had ordered him to be put into chains? Suppose for a moment that he had been guilty of all the crimes in your catalogue, yet must he be first be judged, conclusive evidence brought against him, and he be allowed an opportunity to defend himself: let the law, which is above you and everybody else, be the one to fetter him: before judgement has been given, no man has such powers over any other. Come then, shut up the law-courts, do away with the councillors’ benches, turn out the officers: every word of your address to the Lord Chief I could with greater justice apply in your disfavour. Come down, my Lord, in Thersander’s favour: you are the Chief Justice in name alone. He does your office—nay, more than yours; for you have your assessors, without whom you can come to no decision, and youit necessary to give you an account of myself and of my life: but since you know how remote has been my way of life from the slanders which he has uttered against me, let me discourse to you at greater length upon the actual charges which he brings against me. ‘You have set free,’ he says, ‘one condemned to death’: and on this ground he has called me the hardest names, terming me ‘autocrat’ and all the other grandiloquent nonsense which he was able to trump up against me. But the autocrat is one who in this case has done his best to save not merely those who have been falsely charged, but persons who have done no wrong whatever, and who have been condemned neither by the government nor by the voice of the people. Tell me, Thersander, what was the law by whose authority you originally threw this young man, a foreigner, into gaol? Which of the presiding justices had condemned him? Which court had ordered him to be put into chains? Suppose for a moment that he had been guilty of all the crimes in your catalogue, yet must he be first be judged, conclusive evidence brought against him, and he be allowed an opportunity to defend himself: let the law, which is above you and everybody else, be the one to fetter him: before judgement has been given, no man has such powers over any other. Come then, shut up the law-courts, do away with the councillors’ benches, turn out the officers: every word of your address to the Lord Chief I could with greater justice apply in your disfavour. Come down, my Lord, in Thersander’s favour: you are the Chief Justice in name alone. He does your office—nay, more than yours; for you have your assessors, without whom you can come to no decision, and you never exercise your legal power until you have taken your seat on the bench; you have never in your own house condemned a man to chains: while our good friend here combines all functions in one—people, government, judge, officer, all combined.
 Yes, he gives sentence, he decides his case, he orders people into chains at his own house, and further, he chooses the evening for the time of his court of law: a pretty thing is a juryman that sits at night! And now he dares to bawl repeatedly, ‘You have set free Clitophon who was condemned to death?’ How, death? Condemned for what? Tell me the charge on which he was capitally condemned. ‘He was condemned for murder,’ says he. Very well then, he has committed murder: but upon whom? Come, you see his victim, the very one whom you said had been slain; now you can hardly dare to accuse Clitophon of murder. This is not the girl’s ghost: the god of death has not sent her back here merely to confute you. Two murders lie at your door: by your lies and slanders you have done your best to kill the girl, the youth by your actions. Worse, you were on the very point of actually making an end of her; we know all about your doings on your country estate. But the great goddess Artemis has saved them both: she has saved her from the hands of Sosthenes, and him from yours: Sosthenes you have got out of the way, that you might not be convicted : but do you feel no shame now that it is definitely proved that in the course of your prosecuting speech you have made false accusations against both these foreigners? Gentlemen, I think I have said enough to defend myself against Thersander’s ridiculous abuse: as for the defence of thesenever exercise your legal power until you have taken your seat on the bench; you have never in your own house condemned a man to chains: while our good friend here combines all functions in one—people, government, judge, officer, all combined. Yes, he gives sentence, he decides his case, he orders people into chains at his own house, and further, he chooses the evening for the time of his court of law: a pretty thing is a juryman that sits at night! And now he dares to bawl repeatedly, ‘You have set free Clitophon who was condemned to death?’ How, death? Condemned for what? Tell me the charge on which he was capitally condemned. ‘He was condemned for murder,’ says he. Very well then, he has committed murder: but upon whom? Come, you see his victim, the very one whom you said had been slain; now you can hardly dare to accuse Clitophon of murder. This is not the girl’s ghost: the god of death has not sent her back here merely to confute you. Two murders lie at your door: by your lies and slanders you have done your best to kill the girl, the youth by your actions. Worse, you were on the very point of actually making an end of her; we know all about your doings on your country estate. But the great goddess Artemis has saved them both: she has saved her from the hands of Sosthenes, and him from yours: Sosthenes you have got out of the way, that you might not be convicted : but do you feel no shame now that it is definitely proved that in the course of your prosecuting speech you have made false accusations against both these foreigners? Gentlemen, I think I have said enough to defend myself against Thersander’s ridiculous abuse: as for the defence of these foreigners, I propose to allow them to speak for themselves.
 ” An advocate, who was a speaker of considerable merit and also a member of the council was just rising on behalf of Melite and myself, when another lawyer, called Sopater, who was counsel for Thersander, jumped up before him. “No,” he cried, “it is now my turn to address the court against this adulterous couple, good Sir Nicostratus” (that was my counsel’s name) “and then your turn will come; what Thersander said was directed against the bishop alone, and he did nothing more than touch upon that part of the case which deals with the gaol-bird. When I have finished shewing that he is twice over liable to the capital punishment, it will then be your business to attempt to palliate the charges brought against him.” Thus he spoke with frantic gesticulation and wiping his face: then he went on, “We have all been hearers of the bishop’s farcical ribaldry while he indulged in the most brutal, shameless, trumped-up accusations against Thersander, and all the first part of his speech, which was nothing but calling Thersander back the same names that Thersander had called him. Yet every word that Thersander said was true; the bishop did actually release a criminal from his chains, receive and entertain a harlot, and consort with an adulterer; and as for the shameless false charges he brought when he represented in the worst light Thersander’s way of life, he refrained from no calumny in the course of them. J should have thought the most necessaryforeigners, I propose to allow them to speak for themselves.” An advocate, who was a speaker of considerable merit and also a member of the council was just rising on behalf of Melite and myself, when another lawyer, called Sopater, who was counsel for Thersander, jumped up before him. “No,” he cried, “it is now my turn to address the court against this adulterous couple, good Sir Nicostratus” (that was my counsel’s name) “and then your turn will come; what Thersander said was directed against the bishop alone, and he did nothing more than touch upon that part of the case which deals with the gaol-bird. When I have finished shewing that he is twice over liable to the capital punishment, it will then be your business to attempt to palliate the charges brought against him.” Thus he spoke with frantic gesticulation and wiping his face: then he went on, “We have all been hearers of the bishop’s farcical ribaldry while he indulged in the most brutal, shameless, trumped-up accusations against Thersander, and all the first part of his speech, which was nothing but calling Thersander back the same names that Thersander had called him. Yet every word that Thersander said was true; the bishop did actually release a criminal from his chains, receive and entertain a harlot, and consort with an adulterer; and as for the shameless false charges he brought when he represented in the worst light Thersander’s way of life, he refrained from no calumny in the course of them. J should have thought the most necessary priestly quality of all was a pair of lips clean of guile, to use his own expression against himself.
 As for the high-flown rhetoric of his speech, after the farcical part was over, when he began to speak openly and no longer in riddles, so grievously angered that we had caught a lecher and thrown him into chains, I was very greatly astonished, and wondered what the price could be that was high enough to arouse in him this excess of zeal. But I fear one may suspect the truth: he had taken note of the faces of this scandalous pair, the adulterer and his punk: she is young and pretty, and he is a pretty stripling too, with his cheeks still soft, and one still available for the bishop’s pleasures. Which of them was it, reverend sir, whose charms won you over? You slept all in the same place, you tippled all together, and there was no spectator of how you passed your night. I greatly fear that Artemis’ temple has been made by you into the temple of Aphrodite, and we shall have to sit in judgement on your priesthood, to decide if you are worthy of your cloth. “As for Thersander’s way of life, all here know how that from his first youth it was elegant and discreet; and how, when he came to years of manhood, he married in accordance with the direction of the law, but unfortunately made a mistake in his estimation of the character of his wife, for he found her not what he had hoped, but had put too much trust in her birth and material position. It is like enough that earlier in her married life she misconducted herself with several lovers, but was able to conceal her relations with them from her excellent husband;priestly quality of all was a pair of lips clean of guile, to use his own expression against himself. As for the high-flown rhetoric of his speech, after the farcical part was over, when he began to speak openly and no longer in riddles, so grievously angered that we had caught a lecher and thrown him into chains, I was very greatly astonished, and wondered what the price could be that was high enough to arouse in him this excess of zeal. But I fear one may suspect the truth: he had taken note of the faces of this scandalous pair, the adulterer and his punk: she is young and pretty, and he is a pretty stripling too, with his cheeks still soft, and one still available for the bishop’s pleasures. Which of them was it, reverend sir, whose charms won you over? You slept all in the same place, you tippled all together, and there was no spectator of how you passed your night. I greatly fear that Artemis’ temple has been made by you into the temple of Aphrodite, and we shall have to sit in judgement on your priesthood, to decide if you are worthy of your cloth. “As for Thersander’s way of life, all here know how that from his first youth it was elegant and discreet; and how, when he came to years of manhood, he married in accordance with the direction of the law, but unfortunately made a mistake in his estimation of the character of his wife, for he found her not what he had hoped, but had put too much trust in her birth and material position. It is like enough that earlier in her married life she misconducted herself with several lovers, but was able to conceal her relations with them from her excellent husband; but at the end of her career she threw off even the pretence of modesty and filled up the cup of impudence.
 Her husband had to go abroad for a long stay, and she considered this a suitable opportunity for unfaithfulness. She found a youth who may be described as a sort of male prostitute—perhaps the most wretched part of the business is that the lover she selected is one of those who ape manhood when they are among women, while they count as women among men. Well, it was not enough for her to put aside all fear and live openly with him in a foreign country, but she must needs bring him here over that wide stretch of sea, sleeping with him and exposing her unseemly lust on the boat for all to see. Oh, think of an adulterous intercourse with its shares both on sea and land, drawn out all the way from Egypt to Ionia! Does a woman fall? Then it is but for a single day: or, if the sin be repeated, she hides what she has done and conceals it from the eyes of all: but Melite does not merely proclaim her unfaithfulness in the market place; she has it put abroad by the town-crier! All Ephesus knew of her gallant; she had thought no shame to import him hither from abroad, trafficking in a lover as though he were merchandise, buying him and bringing him hither as a pretty bit of cargo! ‘But I thought,’ says she, ‘that my husband had perished.’ Certainly; if he is dead, you are quit of the charge against you. In that case there is nobody to be injured by the adultery, nor can a marriage be outraged when there is no husband. But if the marriage has not come to an end, owing to the fact that the husband is still alive, then an act of robbery is committed uponbut at the end of her career she threw off even the pretence of modesty and filled up the cup of impudence. Her husband had to go abroad for a long stay, and she considered this a suitable opportunity for unfaithfulness. She found a youth who may be described as a sort of male prostitute—perhaps the most wretched part of the business is that the lover she selected is one of those who ape manhood when they are among women, while they count as women among men. Well, it was not enough for her to put aside all fear and live openly with him in a foreign country, but she must needs bring him here over that wide stretch of sea, sleeping with him and exposing her unseemly lust on the boat for all to see. Oh, think of an adulterous intercourse with its shares both on sea and land, drawn out all the way from Egypt to Ionia! Does a woman fall? Then it is but for a single day: or, if the sin be repeated, she hides what she has done and conceals it from the eyes of all: but Melite does not merely proclaim her unfaithfulness in the market place; she has it put abroad by the town-crier! All Ephesus knew of her gallant; she had thought no shame to import him hither from abroad, trafficking in a lover as though he were merchandise, buying him and bringing him hither as a pretty bit of cargo! ‘But I thought,’ says she, ‘that my husband had perished.’ Certainly; if he is dead, you are quit of the charge against you. In that case there is nobody to be injured by the adultery, nor can a marriage be outraged when there is no husband. But if the marriage has not come to an end, owing to the fact that the husband is still alive, then an act of robbery is committed upon it by the corruption of the wife by a third party.
 Exactly as much as if the marriage did not exist there would be no adulterer, so, as it does exist, an adulterer there must be.” Sopater was still speaking, but his speech was interrupted by Thersander, who cried: “There is no need of further talk. I make two challenges: one to Melite here, and one to that girl who professes to be the daughter of the sacred ambassador, \[with no further question of the torture which I mentioned a little time ago\], but is really my slave.” And he began to read out: —I think I have heard that is the harlot’s name. .” We at once accepted this challenge, having been sure that it would be made: and Melite, who was encouraged by the fact that nothing more serious than words had passed between her and me, also complied. “Certainly,” she said, “I accept this challenge; and I will even add something to it onit by the corruption of the wife by a third party. Exactly as much as if the marriage did not exist there would be no adulterer, so, as it does exist, an adulterer there must be.” Sopater was still speaking, but his speech was interrupted by Thersander, who cried: “There is no need of further talk. I make two challenges: one to Melite here, and one to that girl who professes to be the daughter of the sacred ambassador, \[with no further question of the torture which I mentioned a little time ago\], but is really my slave.” And he began to read out: —I think I have heard that is the harlot’s name. .” We at once accepted this challenge, having been sure that it would be made: and Melite, who was encouraged by the fact that nothing more serious than words had passed between her and me, also complied. “Certainly,” she said, “I accept this challenge; and I will even add something to it on my own account; the most important part of which is that I never allowed anybody, whether citizen or foreigner, to enter into such relations with me during the time of which you speak.
 And now, what ought your penalty to be if you are proved to be a maker of false charges?” “Whatever fine,” said he, “that the jury like to inflict.” These terms settled, the court broke up, and it was decided that the business of the challenge should be determined on the following day. This is the story of the water of the Styx. There was a maiden fair to see, called Rhodopis, passionately fond of hunting and the chase. She was swift of foot and a sure shot: she wore a girdle and a cap, her tunic was girt up at the knee, and her hair was cut short like a man’s. Artemis once saw her, and was delighted with her pursuits; she summoned her, associated her with her in the chase, and many is the time that they hunted together: she took an oath that she would always remain with the goddess; that she would shun the company of men, and that she would never suffer the violence that Aphrodite inspires. Rhodopis swore: Aphrodite heard her, was wroth, and desired to punish the maid for her disdain. Now there was a young man at Ephesus, as fair among the striplings of that town as Rhodopis was among its maidens; Euthynicus was his name, and he was as passionate for the chase as was Rhodopis, and he too desired to know nothing of the power of Aphrodite. So the goddess was determined to attack them both, and brought to the same place the quarries they were hunting; for until that time they had never met, and on that occasion Artemis happened to be away. Aphrodite thereforemy own account; the most important part of which is that I never allowed anybody, whether citizen or foreigner, to enter into such relations with me during the time of which you speak. And now, what ought your penalty to be if you are proved to be a maker of false charges?” “Whatever fine,” said he, “that the jury like to inflict.” These terms settled, the court broke up, and it was decided that the business of the challenge should be determined on the following day. This is the story of the water of the Styx. There was a maiden fair to see, called Rhodopis, passionately fond of hunting and the chase. She was swift of foot and a sure shot: she wore a girdle and a cap, her tunic was girt up at the knee, and her hair was cut short like a man’s. Artemis once saw her, and was delighted with her pursuits; she summoned her, associated her with her in the chase, and many is the time that they hunted together: she took an oath that she would always remain with the goddess; that she would shun the company of men, and that she would never suffer the violence that Aphrodite inspires. Rhodopis swore: Aphrodite heard her, was wroth, and desired to punish the maid for her disdain. Now there was a young man at Ephesus, as fair among the striplings of that town as Rhodopis was among its maidens; Euthynicus was his name, and he was as passionate for the chase as was Rhodopis, and he too desired to know nothing of the power of Aphrodite. So the goddess was determined to attack them both, and brought to the same place the quarries they were hunting; for until that time they had never met, and on that occasion Artemis happened to be away. Aphrodite therefore sent for her son, the Archer; “My child,” said she, “seest thou this pair that reck nought of love and hate us and our mysteries? And the virgin has even sworn a rash oath against me.
 Seest thou too how they are both following the same hind? Do thou begin the sport and that with this too daring maid; and thy dart shall surely miss not its aim.” Both bend their bows—she at the hind, and Love at her; both hit, and after the quarry now is the huntress stricken. The hind received the arrow in its flank, the virgin in her heart; and her arrow was that she should love Euthynicus. Then Love shot another bolt, now at the youth; and then Euthynicus and Rhodopis saw one another. At first they kept their eyes fixed, each on the other, and neither could turn them away: little by little both their wounds began to burn, and then Love drove them to this very cave, where the spring now is, and there they belied their oath. Artemis saw Aphrodite laughing and understood what had happened, and she changed the maiden into a water-spring on the very spot where she had changed, her virginity for womanhood. On this account, if a woman is called into question over affairs of love, she has to go down into the spring and bathe. Now the water is low, reaching only half way to the knee, and this is the procedure of the ordeal. She writes her oath on a tablet, which she then suspends by a string round her neck. If she has sworn a true oath, the spring remains in its place; but if she has perjured herself, the water boils up, rises to the height of her neck, and covers the written tablet.sent for her son, the Archer; “My child,” said she, “seest thou this pair that reck nought of love and hate us and our mysteries? And the virgin has even sworn a rash oath against me. Seest thou too how they are both following the same hind? Do thou begin the sport and that with this too daring maid; and thy dart shall surely miss not its aim.” Both bend their bows—she at the hind, and Love at her; both hit, and after the quarry now is the huntress stricken. The hind received the arrow in its flank, the virgin in her heart; and her arrow was that she should love Euthynicus. Then Love shot another bolt, now at the youth; and then Euthynicus and Rhodopis saw one another. At first they kept their eyes fixed, each on the other, and neither could turn them away: little by little both their wounds began to burn, and then Love drove them to this very cave, where the spring now is, and there they belied their oath. Artemis saw Aphrodite laughing and understood what had happened, and she changed the maiden into a water-spring on the very spot where she had changed, her virginity for womanhood. On this account, if a woman is called into question over affairs of love, she has to go down into the spring and bathe. Now the water is low, reaching only half way to the knee, and this is the procedure of the ordeal. She writes her oath on a tablet, which she then suspends by a string round her neck. If she has sworn a true oath, the spring remains in its place; but if she has perjured herself, the water boils up, rises to the height of her neck, and covers the written tablet.
 We talked over these matters, and as it was now drawing towards evening, we retired, each to his own bed, to sleep. On the following day the whole population of the town was present, and at their head was Thersander, with a smiling and confident face, and he kept looking at us and laughing. Leucippe had been clad in a sacred robe, which was a long tunic of linen, with a girdle about her waist, a scarlet fillet on her head, and bare feet. She thus entered the cave with calm and orderly bearing; but I stood and trembled as I saw her go, saying to myself: “That Leucippe is a virgin, I am sure enough; but it is Pan, my darling, of whom I am afraid. He is a god too fond of virgins, and my fear is that you should be the second to be metamorphosed into a pan-pipes. The former heroine was able to escape him because he pursued her on a plain, and her chase was in broad, open country: but you we have shut up within gates, like a besieged city, so that you will have no chance of flight if he comes after you. My lord Pan, be kindly, and break not the law and custom of the spot, which we, for our part, have kept. Let Leucippe come back to us a virgin; this was thy compact with Artemis, so defraud thou not the virgin goddess.” I was still murmuring thus to myself, when a strain of music sounded, and it was said that never had sweeter notes than those been heard from the grotto: and then we saw the doors open. Out sprang Leucippe, and all the people shouted for joy and began to revile Thersander, while I cannot express the state of delight in which I found myself.
 We therefore retired, having won one magnificent victory; and we then went on to the second ordeal, that of the Styx. The people also came thither from the cave in order to witness the spectacle; and there too the whole process was gone through. Melite put on the tablet round her neck, the water was clear and shallow; she descended into it and stood there with a smiling and cheerful face. The water remained at exactly its previous depth, rising not even an inch above its accustomed level. When the time had passed during which she had to stand in the spring, the presiding judge took her by the hand and led her out of the water; and so Thersander was defeated in two trials of strength. Guessing that he would be beaten in the third too, he slipped away and hurried to his house, fearing that he would be stoned by the populace: for at that moment came four youths, dragging with them Sosthenes—two of them Melite’s kinsmen, and two of them her servants—whom she had sent to look for him. But Thersander had observed what was happening from afar, and knowing that if Sosthenes were put to the torture he would reveal the whole plot, determined to flee before this could happen, and so privately left the city when night fell. After Thersander had left the scene, the magistrates ordered Sosthenes to be put in ward; and we then departed, having thus won the mastery over our enemies, and having blessings called down upon our heads by all the people. On the following day those appointed for the purpose brought Sosthenes before the magistrates. Immediately that he realised that he was being brought out to be put to the question, he told the whole story without concealment, both Thersander’s attempts and his own contributions towards the success of the plot: and he did not even leave out the conversation which they had had with one another before the doors of the hut where Leucippe was confined.
 He was therefore thrust back into prison to await his sentence, while against Thersander in absence a decree of banishment was passed. As for us, the bishop entertained us once more in his usual hospitable fashion, and during dinner we conversed on the same subjects as on the previous occasion, making particular mention of any details of our adventures which were then omitted. Leucippe especially, being now no longer shy in her father’s company, as her virginity was clearly proved, related her story with the greatest pleasure. When she came to the part connected with the island of Pharos and the pirates: “Tell us,” said I to her, “of the stratagem which the Pharian pirates devised and explain the riddle of the decapitated woman for your father too to hear; for that is the only point still lacking to the complete understanding of the whole romance.” “She was one of those unfortunate women,” said she, “who make a traffic of love. The pirates had imposed upon her, on the pretext that she was to become the wife of a skipper who was aboard; and they kept her on the ship, where she did not know the real reason that they desired her presence, but was secretly intimate with one of the pirates, who was supposed to be her lover. Now when they carried me off, as you saw, and put me aboard andattempts and his own contributions towards the success of the plot: and he did not even leave out the conversation which they had had with one another before the doors of the hut where Leucippe was confined. He was therefore thrust back into prison to await his sentence, while against Thersander in absence a decree of banishment was passed. As for us, the bishop entertained us once more in his usual hospitable fashion, and during dinner we conversed on the same subjects as on the previous occasion, making particular mention of any details of our adventures which were then omitted. Leucippe especially, being now no longer shy in her father’s company, as her virginity was clearly proved, related her story with the greatest pleasure. When she came to the part connected with the island of Pharos and the pirates: “Tell us,” said I to her, “of the stratagem which the Pharian pirates devised and explain the riddle of the decapitated woman for your father too to hear; for that is the only point still lacking to the complete understanding of the whole romance.” “She was one of those unfortunate women,” said she, “who make a traffic of love. The pirates had imposed upon her, on the pretext that she was to become the wife of a skipper who was aboard; and they kept her on the ship, where she did not know the real reason that they desired her presence, but was secretly intimate with one of the pirates, who was supposed to be her lover. Now when they carried me off, as you saw, and put me aboard and went off with all the speed that their oars could effect, they saw that the pursuing vessel was gaining upon them; they therefore stripped the poor woman of her ornaments and clothes, which they put upon me, while they clad her in my garments, and then put her on the prow, where you, the pursuers, could see all that took place, and struck off her head.
 Her body, as you saw, they threw into the sea, while they picked up her head and kept it for the time on the ship: not long after, when they were no longer being pursued, they made away with her head too and threw it overboard. I do not know whether that was the actual reason that they had arranged to have the woman on the ship, or whether they intended to sell her as a slave, just as they afterwards bartered me away: but at any rate, when they were chased, they killed her in my place to cheat their pursuers, thinking that they would gain a greater profit from my sale than from hers. The result was that I saw Chaereas suffer the fate he deserved—it was he who had advised them to kill the female, and throw her overboard instead of me. The rest of the band of pirates said that they were certainly not going to hand me over to him alone; he had already had his share in the body of one slave, which, if sold, would have afforded them a considerable gain to begin with; and in the place of the dead woman I must be sold and so be a common source of profit to them all rather than to him only. He objected to this, arguing with them and alleging the agreement to which he had come with them; he asserted that he had not carried me off for them to sell, but to be his mistress. He went on to speak in a somewhatwent off with all the speed that their oars could effect, they saw that the pursuing vessel was gaining upon them; they therefore stripped the poor woman of her ornaments and clothes, which they put upon me, while they clad her in my garments, and then put her on the prow, where you, the pursuers, could see all that took place, and struck off her head. Her body, as you saw, they threw into the sea, while they picked up her head and kept it for the time on the ship: not long after, when they were no longer being pursued, they made away with her head too and threw it overboard. I do not know whether that was the actual reason that they had arranged to have the woman on the ship, or whether they intended to sell her as a slave, just as they afterwards bartered me away: but at any rate, when they were chased, they killed her in my place to cheat their pursuers, thinking that they would gain a greater profit from my sale than from hers. The result was that I saw Chaereas suffer the fate he deserved—it was he who had advised them to kill the female, and throw her overboard instead of me. The rest of the band of pirates said that they were certainly not going to hand me over to him alone; he had already had his share in the body of one slave, which, if sold, would have afforded them a considerable gain to begin with; and in the place of the dead woman I must be sold and so be a common source of profit to them all rather than to him only. He objected to this, arguing with them and alleging the agreement to which he had come with them; he asserted that he had not carried me off for them to sell, but to be his mistress. He went on to speak in a somewhat violent manner, when one of the pirates, I am thankful to say, crept behind him and struck off his head.
 He thus received the most providential reward for his violent abduction of me, and was himself thrown into the sea: the pirates sailed on for two days more, carrying me to some county or other, I know not where, and sold me to their regular slave-dealer, and he in turn to Sosthenes.” Then said Sostratus: “Now that you, my children, have finished your stories, listen to mine: the story of what happened at home with regard to Calligone—your sister, Clitophon; I shall thus not have contributed absolutely nothing to these excellent recitals.” Hearing the name of my sister, I was all attention: “Speak on, father,” said I, “only may your story be of one who is still in the land of the living!” He began by recounting all that I described some time ago—about Callisthenes, and the oracle, and the sacred embassy, and the boat, and the abduction. He then went on: “Callisthenes, during the course of the voyage, realised that she was not my daughter, and that his attempt had therefore completely failed of its object: yet all the same he fell in love with Calligone, and that violently. Throwing himself at her feet, ‘Lady’ said he, ‘think not that I am a pirate or common malefactor; well born am I, a Byzantine, second to none, by descent: love made me act a pirate’s part and weave this plot against you. So from this day forward count me your slave. I bring you as a marriage portion, first of all myself, and, secondly, greater wealth than yourviolent manner, when one of the pirates, I am thankful to say, crept behind him and struck off his head. He thus received the most providential reward for his violent abduction of me, and was himself thrown into the sea: the pirates sailed on for two days more, carrying me to some county or other, I know not where, and sold me to their regular slave-dealer, and he in turn to Sosthenes.” Then said Sostratus: “Now that you, my children, have finished your stories, listen to mine: the story of what happened at home with regard to Calligone—your sister, Clitophon; I shall thus not have contributed absolutely nothing to these excellent recitals.” Hearing the name of my sister, I was all attention: “Speak on, father,” said I, “only may your story be of one who is still in the land of the living!” He began by recounting all that I described some time ago—about Callisthenes, and the oracle, and the sacred embassy, and the boat, and the abduction. He then went on: “Callisthenes, during the course of the voyage, realised that she was not my daughter, and that his attempt had therefore completely failed of its object: yet all the same he fell in love with Calligone, and that violently. Throwing himself at her feet, ‘Lady’ said he, ‘think not that I am a pirate or common malefactor; well born am I, a Byzantine, second to none, by descent: love made me act a pirate’s part and weave this plot against you. So from this day forward count me your slave. I bring you as a marriage portion, first of all myself, and, secondly, greater wealth than your father would have allotted to you as your dowry: and I will respect your virginity as long as seems good to you!’ By means of these words and others like them he was not unsuccessful in inducing the maiden to look upon him favourably, as he was handsome and both ready and persuasive of speech.
 On his arrival, too, at Byzantium, he made a marriage settlement of a very large sum of money upon her, and also provided her most handsomely with all else that she could require—clothes, gold, and all the ornaments that wealthy women wear: he treated her with the greatest respect, and, as he had promised, made no attempt on her chastity: with the result that he very soon captured her heart. In the other departments of life too he shewed himself polite, virtuous, and discreet; a most wonderful change had taken place in him! He would rise from his chair when anyone older than himself entered the room, he would be careful to be the first to salute people whom he met, and his former indiscriminate prodigality turned to prudence, but remained a copious liberality to those who, through their poverty, must needs accept favours. All wondered at this sudden transformation from the bad to the really excellent: I was perhaps of all the most attracted by him, both because I was naturally very fond of him and also because I thought that his former irregularities were more the result of an excess of extravagance, but never of vice. “I called to mind the case of Themistocles; how he in his early youth appeared to indulge in thefather would have allotted to you as your dowry: and I will respect your virginity as long as seems good to you!’ By means of these words and others like them he was not unsuccessful in inducing the maiden to look upon him favourably, as he was handsome and both ready and persuasive of speech. On his arrival, too, at Byzantium, he made a marriage settlement of a very large sum of money upon her, and also provided her most handsomely with all else that she could require—clothes, gold, and all the ornaments that wealthy women wear: he treated her with the greatest respect, and, as he had promised, made no attempt on her chastity: with the result that he very soon captured her heart. In the other departments of life too he shewed himself polite, virtuous, and discreet; a most wonderful change had taken place in him! He would rise from his chair when anyone older than himself entered the room, he would be careful to be the first to salute people whom he met, and his former indiscriminate prodigality turned to prudence, but remained a copious liberality to those who, through their poverty, must needs accept favours. All wondered at this sudden transformation from the bad to the really excellent: I was perhaps of all the most attracted by him, both because I was naturally very fond of him and also because I thought that his former irregularities were more the result of an excess of extravagance, but never of vice. “I called to mind the case of Themistocles; how he in his early youth appeared to indulge in the wildest excesses, but later on excelled all the Athenians in wisdom and bravery.
 And so I began to be sorry that I had contemptuously rejected him when he had broached the subject of an alliance with my daughter—particularly as he always shewed me the greatest attention, calling me ‘Father,’ and escorting me through the open squares. Nor did he neglect the training that is necessary for military glory, but greatly distinguished himself in the cavalry exercises: indeed, even in the time of his dissipation he had been fond of horses and familiar with their use, but only as a distraction or a luxury, and he had thus, without knowing it, encouraged in himself the spirit of bravery and skill in horsemanship. It finally became his object to gain distinction in war by his endurance and his versatility: he gave large contributions towards the public services; and then his fellow-citizens appointed him as an associate-general with me, a position which made him still more deferential and cordial towards me, shewing himself willing to accede to my wishes at every turn. “After we had brought the war to a successful conclusion, owing to the divine manifestations in our favour, we returned to Byzantium, as we desired to express our gratitude to Hercules and Artemis. It was voted I should be the delegate hither to Artemis and he to Hercules at Tyre. Before our departure, Callisthenes took me by the hand and told me the whole story about Calligone. ‘As for what I did, father,’ said he, ‘it began as a deed of violence in the heat of youth, but it has gone on as a matter of sober inclination. Up to this very moment I have respected her chastity, and that in-war-time,wildest excesses, but later on excelled all the Athenians in wisdom and bravery. And so I began to be sorry that I had contemptuously rejected him when he had broached the subject of an alliance with my daughter—particularly as he always shewed me the greatest attention, calling me ‘Father,’ and escorting me through the open squares. Nor did he neglect the training that is necessary for military glory, but greatly distinguished himself in the cavalry exercises: indeed, even in the time of his dissipation he had been fond of horses and familiar with their use, but only as a distraction or a luxury, and he had thus, without knowing it, encouraged in himself the spirit of bravery and skill in horsemanship. It finally became his object to gain distinction in war by his endurance and his versatility: he gave large contributions towards the public services; and then his fellow-citizens appointed him as an associate-general with me, a position which made him still more deferential and cordial towards me, shewing himself willing to accede to my wishes at every turn. “After we had brought the war to a successful conclusion, owing to the divine manifestations in our favour, we returned to Byzantium, as we desired to express our gratitude to Hercules and Artemis. It was voted I should be the delegate hither to Artemis and he to Hercules at Tyre. Before our departure, Callisthenes took me by the hand and told me the whole story about Calligone. ‘As for what I did, father,’ said he, ‘it began as a deed of violence in the heat of youth, but it has gone on as a matter of sober inclination. Up to this very moment I have respected her chastity, and that in-war-time, when men are generally not accustomed to defer their pleasures.
 I have therefore now decided to take her back to her father at Tyre, and there to ask him to give her to me in marriage in accordance with the law. If he will give her to me, I will take her and rejoice at my good fortune; if he makes objections and refuses, he shall take her back, still a virgin: I have given her a marriage portion which is not to be despised, and I would gladly conclude the marriage.’ I will read you the letter which I wrote before he went to fight, asking Hippias to unite the girl to Callisthenes: in it is recited his good birth and worth, and also his brave deeds in the field: that is the arrangement that Callisthenes and I made. As for myself, if we are successful in the appeal, I have made up my mind to sail first for Byzantium, and after that to proceed to Tyre.” When we had finished all this conversation, we retired to our couches as on the previous occasions. On the following day Clinias came and told us that Thersander had fled in the night; he had appealed without any intention of appearing, and only wished, under this pretence, to put off the trial at which his plot would have come to light. We therefore stayed three days more, the legal time for renewing proceedings, and then appeared before thewhen men are generally not accustomed to defer their pleasures. I have therefore now decided to take her back to her father at Tyre, and there to ask him to give her to me in marriage in accordance with the law. If he will give her to me, I will take her and rejoice at my good fortune; if he makes objections and refuses, he shall take her back, still a virgin: I have given her a marriage portion which is not to be despised, and I would gladly conclude the marriage.’ I will read you the letter which I wrote before he went to fight, asking Hippias to unite the girl to Callisthenes: in it is recited his good birth and worth, and also his brave deeds in the field: that is the arrangement that Callisthenes and I made. As for myself, if we are successful in the appeal, I have made up my mind to sail first for Byzantium, and after that to proceed to Tyre.” When we had finished all this conversation, we retired to our couches as on the previous occasions. On the following day Clinias came and told us that Thersander had fled in the night; he had appealed without any intention of appearing, and only wished, under this pretence, to put off the trial at which his plot would have come to light. We therefore stayed three days more, the legal time for renewing proceedings, and then appeared before the Chief Justice, where we had the laws read in accordance with which Thersander could no longer have any cause of action against us.
 We then took ship and, obtaining a favouring wind, arrived at Byzantium, where we celebrated the marriage for which we had so long prayed, and thence set out for Tyre. We reached it two days after the arrival of Callisthenes, and we there found my father just about to offer the proper sacrifices for my sister’s wedding, which was to take place on the following day. At this we were present to join in the sacrifices and to pray the gods that both my marriage and his might be guarded and secured by the best of fortune; and our intention was to pass the winter at Tyre and afterwards to proceed to Byzantium.Chief Justice, where we had the laws read in accordance with which Thersander could no longer have any cause of action against us. We then took ship and, obtaining a favouring wind, arrived at Byzantium, where we celebrated the marriage for which we had so long prayed, and thence set out for Tyre. We reached it two days after the arrival of Callisthenes, and we there found my father just about to offer the proper sacrifices for my sister’s wedding, which was to take place on the following day. At this we were present to join in the sacrifices and to pray the gods that both my marriage and his might be guarded and secured by the best of fortune; and our intention was to pass the winter at Tyre and afterwards to proceed to Byzantium.